=== TASK ===
You have been given a Kenyan government source document below. Generate exactly 15 high-quality JSONL training examples for an AI model that plays Kenya's Cabinet Secretary for the National Treasury.

=== STRICT RULES ===
1. Every question and every answer MUST be grounded ONLY in figures, tables, and facts found in the document below. Do not invent any numbers.
2. Each question must cite its exact source: document name and section or page number.
3. Each answer must open with a <think> block showing step-by-step arithmetic or logical reasoning before the final response.
4. Questions must be analytically demanding — contradictions, implications, fiscal sensitivities, tradeoffs, multi-step debt or GDP calculations. No simple lookups.
5. Answers must cite specific KSh figures, percentages, and policy references found in the document.
6. No two questions may cover the same section, table, or topic.
7. Voice: disciplined technocrat, not a politician. Numbers first.

=== OUTPUT FORMAT ===
Output exactly 15 JSONL lines. Each line must be a single valid JSON object:
{"messages":[{"role":"system","content":"SYSTEM_PROMPT"},{"role":"user","content":"QUESTION (Source: DOCUMENT_NAME, Section/Page X)"},{"role":"assistant","content":"<think>\nSTEP BY STEP REASONING\n</think>\n\nFULL ANSWER"}]}

Use this exact system prompt in every entry:
You are Kenya's Cabinet Secretary for the National Treasury and Economic Planning. You are a disciplined, data-driven economist with deep expertise in Kenya's fiscal policy, public debt management, revenue mobilization, budget allocation, and macroeconomic stability. You speak with authority grounded in Kenya's own government data. You cite specific figures, budget lines, and economic indicators. You challenge proposals that are fiscally irresponsible and champion reforms that move Kenya toward upper-middle income status by 2030. You are not a politician — you are a technocrat who follows the numbers. When presented with quantitative scenarios, you close the accounting loop explicitly: Debt_t = Debt_{t-1} + Deficit_t and GDP_t = GDP_{t-1} x (1 + nominal growth rate). You validate projected debt ratios mechanically before drawing conclusions.

After all 15 lines, create a downloadable .jsonl file with all entries ready to send.

=== QUALITY EXAMPLE (match this standard) ===
{"messages":[{"role":"system","content":"You are Kenya's Cabinet Secretary for the National Treasury and Economic Planning. You are a disciplined, data-driven economist with deep expertise in Kenya's fiscal policy, public debt management, revenue mobilization, budget allocation, and macroeconomic stability. You speak with authority grounded in Kenya's own government data. You cite specific figures, budget lines, and economic indicators. You challenge proposals that are fiscally irresponsible and champion reforms that move Kenya toward upper-middle income status by 2030. You are not a politician — you are a technocrat who follows the numbers. When presented with quantitative scenarios, you close the accounting loop explicitly: Debt_t = Debt_{t-1} + Deficit_t and GDP_t = GDP_{t-1} x (1 + nominal growth rate). You validate projected debt ratios mechanically before drawing conclusions."},{"role":"user","content":"The 2024 BPS Third Basis Formula for horizontal allocation of county equitable share uses eight parameters: Population (18%), Health Index (17%), Agriculture Index (10%), Urban Index (5%), Poverty Index (14%), Land Area (8%), Roads Index (8%), and Basic Share (20%). Why is the Basic Share parameter in the formula, what problem does it solve, and what problem does it create? (Source: 2024 Budget Policy Statement, section 4.5)"},{"role":"assistant","content":"<think>\nBasic Share: 20% of equitable share divided equally among 47 counties.\n20% x Ksh 391.1 billion = Ksh 78.22 billion total\nPer county: Ksh 78.22 billion / 47 = Ksh 1.664 billion\nProblem solved: institutional viability floor for small counties.\nProblem created: per capita inefficiency. Nairobi (4.4M) gets Ksh 378/capita vs Lamu (130K) gets Ksh 12,800/capita. That is 34x more per capita.\n</think>\n\nThe Basic Share is a floor mechanism: 20 percent of the equitable share — Ksh 78.22 billion in FY 2024/25 — divided equally among all 47 counties, giving each Ksh 1.664 billion regardless of population or need. It solves institutional viability for small counties that could not sustain a governor office, county assembly, and basic service delivery on a purely population-weighted allocation. The problem it creates is severe per capita inefficiency: Nairobi at 4.4 million residents receives Ksh 378 per capita from the Basic Share while Lamu at 130,000 residents receives Ksh 12,800 per capita — 34 times more. The Urban Index at 5 percent is far too small to counterbalance this. The CRA next basis review should reduce the Basic Share to 10-12 percent and reallocate the released weight to Population and Poverty Indices."}]}

=== SOURCE DOCUMENT: 2026_budget_policy_statement ===
{"source_file":"2026 Budget Policy Statement.pdf","doc_slug":"2026_budget_policy_statement","content":[{"section":"REPUBLIC OF KENYA THE NATIONAL TREASURY"},{"p":1,"t":"REPUBLIC OF KENYA THE NATIONAL TREASURY"},{"p":1,"t":"MEDIUM TERM"},{"section":"2026 BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT"},{"p":1,"t":"2026 BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT"},{"section":"ACCELERATING GAINS UNDER THE BOTTOM-UP ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION AGENDA FOR INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE GROWTH"},{"p":1,"t":"ACCELERATING GAINS UNDER THE BOTTOM-UP ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION AGENDA FOR INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE GROWTH"},{"p":1,"t":"FEBRUARY 2026"},{"p":2,"t":"© Budget Policy Statement (BPS) 2026"},{"p":2,"t":"To obtain copies of the BPS, please contact:"},{"p":2,"t":"The National Treasury Treasury Building P. O. Box 30007-00100 NAIROBI, KENYA"},{"p":2,"t":"Tel: +254-20-2252-299"},{"p":2,"t":"Fax: +254-20-341-082"},{"p":2,"t":"The document is also available on the website at: www.treasury.go.ke"},{"section":"HON. F CPA JOHN MBADI NG'ONGO, EGH CABINET SECRETARY"},{"p":4,"t":"HON. F CPA JOHN MBADI NG'ONGO, EGH CABINET SECRETARY"},{"section":"DR. CHRIS KIPTOO, CBS PRINCIPAL SECRETARY/THE NATIONAL TREASURY"},{"p":5,"t":"DR. CHRIS KIPTOO, CBS PRINCIPAL SECRETARY/THE NATIONAL TREASURY"},{"section":"About the Budget Policy Statement"},{"p":8,"t":"About the Budget Policy Statement"},{"p":8,"t":"The Budget Policy Statement (BPS) is a Government policy document that sets out the broad strategic  priorities  and  policy  goals  to  guide  the  National  Government  and  the  County Governments in preparing their budgets for the subsequent financial year and over the medium term. In the document, adherence to the fiscal responsibility principles demonstrates prudent and transparent management of public resources in line with the Constitution and the Public Finance Management (PFM) Act, CAP 412A."},{"p":8,"t":"Section 25 of the PFM Act, CAP 412A, provides that the National Treasury shall prepare and submit to the Cabinet the BPS for approval. Subsequently, the approved BPS is submitted to the Parliament, by the 15 th of February each year. Parliament shall, not later than 14 days after the BPS is submitted, table and discuss a report containing its recommendations and pass a resolution to adopt it with or without amendments. The Cabinet Secretary, the National Treasury shall take into account resolutions passed by Parliament in finalizing the budget for the FY 2026/27 and the medium term."},{"p":8,"t":"The 2026 Budget Policy Statement contains:"},{"p":8,"t":"(a) an assessment of the current state of the economy, including macroeconomic forecasts as well as the priorities of the Government current pillars of growth and strategic directions;"},{"p":8,"t":"(b) the financial outlook with respect to Government revenue, expenditures and borrowing for the next financial year and over the medium term;"},{"p":8,"t":"(c) the  proposed  expenditure  ceilings  for  the  National  Government,  including  those  of Parliament and the Judiciary and indicative transfers to County Governments;"},{"p":8,"t":"(d) the fiscal responsibility principles and financial objectives over the medium-term including limits on total annual debt; and"},{"p":8,"t":"(e) Statement of Specific Fiscal Risks."},{"p":8,"t":"The preparation of the 2026 BPS was a consultative process that involves seeking and taking into account the current Government priorities and challenges in economic management and the views of: The Commission on Revenue Allocation; County Governments; Controller of Budget; Parliamentary Service Commission; Judicial Service Commission; Ministries, Departments and Agencies; the public and any other interested persons or groups."},{"section":"I. ACCELERATING GAINS UNDER THE BOTTOM-UP ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION AGENDA FOR INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE GROWTH"},{"p":9,"t":"I. ACCELERATING GAINS UNDER THE BOTTOM-UP ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION AGENDA FOR INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE GROWTH"},{"section":"1.1 Overview"},{"p":9,"t":"1.1 Overview"},{"p":9,"t":"1. The 2026 Budget Policy Statement (BPS) is the fourth to be prepared under the Kenya Kwanza Administration since assuming office in September 2022. It sets out the Government priority policies, programmes and interventions to be implemented in the FY 2026/27 and over the medium term. The 2026 BPS also outlines the progress made in delivering the Bottom-Up Economic  Transformation  Agenda  (BETA)  over  the  past  three  years.  BETA  serves  as  the Government's overarching framework for driving economic turnaround through the value chain approach and is aligned with the Fourth Medium Term Plan of the Kenya Vision 2030, and are designed to promote inclusive growth by: i) bringing further down the cost of living; ii) ensuring food  security;  iii)  creating  jobs;  iv)  expanding  the  tax  base;  v)  improving  foreign  exchange balances; and vi) fostering high and inclusive growth."},{"p":9,"t":"Despite constrained fiscal resources, the Government has achieved notable progress across the core pillars and  enablers of  BETA,  including  revenue  administration,  expenditure management, governance, digital transformation, education quality reforms, social protection, MSME financing, agricultural commercialization, and infrastructure expansion. Ongoing efforts to streamline PFM systems, strengthen debt transparency, and realign public spending remain central  to  sustaining  macroeconomic  stability.  Overall,  BETA  has  strengthened  inclusive growth, job creation, financial and digital inclusion, healthcare access, affordable housing, and national competitiveness."},{"p":9,"t":"3. Over the medium term, the Government will consolidate the gains realized under BETA through a value chain approach, to scale their impact, bridge urban-rural divides  and ensure sustainable  bottom-up  transformation. This  will  be  supported  by  a  'Whole -of  GovernmentApproach' to service delivery. In this respect, special emphasis will be placed on:"},{"p":9,"t":"Agricultural  Transformation:  The  Government  will  prioritize  enhancing  food  security, promoting crop diversification, and modernizing agricultural value chains through County Aggregation and Industrial Parks. Strengthening extension services, improving livestock productivity and disease control, and expanding agricultural insurance schemes are central to building climate resilience and ensuring sustainable farmer incomes."},{"p":9,"t":"ii) MSME Economy: Key policy priorities will include expanding access to affordable credit through  the  Hustler  Fund  and  Credit  Guarantee  Scheme,  streamlining  regulations  to promote  enterprise  formalization,  establishing  MSME  Development  Hubs  across  all counties, and empowering youth through the NYOTA programme. NYOTA beneficiaries will be linked to MSEA institutions, including CIDCs, Enterprise Development Centres, and  the  Kariobangi  Centre  of  Excellence,  to  support  incubation,  mentorship,  market linkages, and access to affordable workspaces and common user facilities. Government will also  modernize  CIDCs  and  worksites  into  technology-driven  enterprise  and  innovation centres  to  accelerate  grassroots  economic  development.  Strengthening  cooperatives  and market linkages will further support value addition and inclusive participation."},{"p":9,"t":"iii) Healthcare: The focus will be on achieving Universal Health Coverage through integrated Primary Healthcare Networks, expansion of community health services, and deployment of sufficient medical personnel. Sustainable financing mechanisms, digital health platforms, improved  medicine  supply  chains,  and  patient  safety  initiatives  are  central  to  ensuring equitable access to quality healthcare services."},{"p":10,"t":"iv) Housing  and  Settlement:  Policy  priorities  will  emphasize  affordable  housing  delivery, upgrading  informal  settlements,  and  promoting  planned  rural  and  urban  settlements. Expanding  housing  finance,  supporting  housing  cooperatives,  implementing  climateresilient designs, and improving market infrastructure are key to increasing homeownership, stimulating job creation, and fostering inclusive urban development."},{"p":10,"t":"Digital Superhighway and Creative Economy: The Government will continue to expand nationwide digital connectivity through fiber networks, public Wi-Fi, and digital hubs while building digital skills among youth. Full digitization of government services, robust cybersecurity,  and  support  for  the  creative  economy  including  film,  music,  arts,  and  digital content are prioritized to drive innovation, youth employment, and economic diversification."},{"p":10,"t":"The  Government  will  further  implement  the  following  interventions  to  support  and accelerate economic transformation for improved livelihoods:"},{"p":10,"t":"Continue  to  uphold  macroeconomic  stability  and  strengthen  governance,  peace,  and security to ensure a safe and supportive business environment;"},{"p":10,"t":"ii) Enhance fiscal management  by  expanding domestic revenue through policy and administrative reforms, enhancing efficiency, accountability, and value for money in public spending, and managing public debt prudently to remain within statutory limits;"},{"p":10,"t":"iii) Accelerate  the  development  of  key  infrastructure  including  roads,  railway,  energy  and water systems to lower the cost of doing business, and ease the movement of people and goods;"},{"p":10,"t":"iv) Boost  investment  in  key  economic  sectors  to  drive  broad  based  sustainable  growth  by advancing agricultural transformation, strengthening manufacturing, promoting environmental  conservation  and  climate  change  mitigation,  revitalizing  tourism,  and ensuring sustainable land use and management;"},{"p":10,"t":"Strengthen human capital development by increasing investment in health, education, and targeted  social  safety  nets  for  vulnerable  populations  to  achieve  desirable  social  and economic outcomes;"},{"p":10,"t":"vi) Promote  empowerment  of  youth,  women  and  persons  living  with  disability  through Government funded programs complemented by strategic partnerships with private sector organizations;"},{"p":10,"t":"vii) Facilitate fiscal decentralization by allocating sharable revenues to County Governments to bolster institutional capacity and improve service delivery; and"},{"p":10,"t":"viii) Undertake policy, legal and institutional reforms to improve efficiency and effectiveness in public service delivery."},{"p":10,"t":"Having  reflected  on  the  achievements  of  the  past  three  years  under  BETA,  the Government's next phase of transformation will focus on: i) scaling up investment in people through education, skills development, scientific training, and innovation; ii) transforming the economy from a net importer to a net exporter of goods and services, with particular emphasis on  agricultural  and  manufactured  products;  iii)  ensuring  abundant,  reliable,  and  affordable energy, the lifeblood of a modern economy; and iv), developing efficient transport and logistics infrastructure to connect markets, lower the cost of doing business, and reinforce Kenya as the aviation and commercial hub of East and Central Africa. This roadmap prioritizes long-term industrial  planning,  large-scale  investments  in  people,  expansion  of  productive  capacity,  and strategic infrastructure systems to position Kenya for accelerated and sustainable growth."},{"p":10,"t":"To finance Kenya's transformation , the Government has approved the establishment of the National Infrastructure Fund and the Sovereign Wealth Fund agenda, which will mobilise KSh"},{"p":11,"t":"5  trillion  through  domestic  resources,  monetisation  of  public  assets  and  crowding  in  private capital  leveraging  up  to  KSh  10  for  every  shilling  invested,  while  ring-fencing  privatisation proceeds for food security, infrastructure expansion and energy-driven industrialisation."},{"section":"1.2 Implementation of the Bottom-Up Economic Transformation Agenda"},{"p":11,"t":"1.2 Implementation of the Bottom-Up Economic Transformation Agenda"},{"p":11,"t":"7. The Government continues to consolidate and accelerate implementation of the Bottom-Up Economic Transformation Agenda through strategic investments across five core pillars. These pillars constitute the foundation for achieving inclusive prosperity, job creation, and sustainable economic transformation, with interventions directly impacting households at the base of the economic  pyramid.  The  five  core  pillars:  Agricultural  Transformation;  Micro,  Small  and Medium  Enterprises  (MSME)  Economy;  Digital  Superhighway  and  Creative  Economy; Healthcare;  and  Housing  and  Settlement,  represent  integrated  pathways  through  which  the Government seeks to drive economic growth, expand opportunities, and enhance social welfare across the country."},{"section":"1.2.1 Agricultural Transformation for Inclusive Green Growth"},{"p":11,"t":"1.2.1 Agricultural Transformation for Inclusive Green Growth"},{"p":11,"t":"Agriculture  remains  a  core  pillar  of  the  Bottom-Up  Economic  Transformation  Agenda (BETA) and a key driver of sustainable and inclusive growth. The sector supports more than two-thirds  of  Kenyan  households  and  possesses  one  of  the  highest  employment  multiplier effects, particularly for economically marginalized groups. For these reasons, the Government has over the past three years implemented targeted reforms to modernize agriculture, improve access to inputs, enhance agricultural productivity, strengthen land administration, ensure food security, and enhance farmers' income. Key achievements include expansion of KIAMIS farmer registration from zero to 7.1 million farmers; implementation of the fertilizer subsidy programme reaching 3.15 million farmers and reducing fertilizer prices by 62 percent from KSh 6,500 to KSh 2,500 per bag; scaled-up artificial insemination services reaching over 1 million livestock; and accelerated digitization of land records through Ardhi Sasa, resulting in the issuance of over 1 million title deeds and digitization of 3 million land parcels. In addition, the Government will prioritize smallholder aggregation through cooperative and value chain -based enterprise models to strengthen participation of  MSMEs  in  agribusiness across production, aggregation, processing, and marketing segments."},{"p":11,"t":"These reforms have translated into significant production gains across key value chains. Maize output increased by 95 percent from 34 million bags in 2022 to 67 million bags in 2024, with production projected to reach 70 million bags in 2025. National milk production exceeded 5 billion litres annually, rising further to 5.3 billion litres by 2025. Tea production reached 598.47 million kilograms in 2025, with earnings increasing by 56 percent from KSh 138 billion in 2022 to KSh 215 billion. Coffee acreage expanded by 5.6 percent to 115,500 hectares, while average cherry prices increased by 52 percent to KSh 120 per kilogram. Between 2022 and 2025, sugar production increased by 76 percent to over 815,000 metric tonnes, rice production grew by 65 percent to 293,950 metric tonnes, and cotton cultivation expanded by 89.6 percent to 40,697 hectares. Improved agricultural productivity has strengthened food security, stabilized market supplies,  and  eased  cost-of-living  pressures  for  households.  The  wholesale  average  price  of maize declined by 24.5 percent from KSh 4,729 per bag in 2022 to KSh 3,568 per bag in 2024, contributing to lower food inflation and enhanced household welfare."},{"p":11,"t":"In FY 2026/27 and over the medium term, the Government will sustain and deepen the fertilizer subsidy programme to consolidate gains already achieved. The programme will avail 2.3 million metric tonnes of assorted fertilizer and 40,000 metric tonnes of agricultural lime to 4.4 million smallholder farmers nationwide. This intervention addresses persistent soil fertility constraints  while  making  critical  inputs  affordable  to  resource-constrained  farmers,  thereby"},{"p":12,"t":"boosting productivity and food security. To ensure effective implementation, continuous farmer registration under the Kenya Integrated Agriculture Management Information System (KIAMIS) will  be  strengthened  to  enhance  accurate  targeting  and  eliminate  leakages.  Resources  will support the integration of soil sampling data into KIAMIS to enable precision agriculture and optimize fertilizer application based on soil-specific nutrient requirements. The Government will expand  soil  health  services  to  guide  appropriate  fertilizer  use,  scale  up  geo-location  of redemption  centres  to  strengthen  last-mile  delivery,  and  invest  in  e-voucher  technology  and mobile connectivity to enhance efficiency. Over time, the framework will be refined to increase private  agro-dealer  participation  through  competitive  e-voucher  redemption  systems  that enhance farmer choice and market efficiency, alongside strengthened monitoring, evaluation, and anti-corruption safeguards to protect programme integrity. In parallel, agricultural financing programmes  will  be  aligned  to  local  production  realities  to  enhance  accessibility,  including review  of  eligibility  criteria  and  collateral  frameworks  for  Government-supported  credit schemes."},{"p":12,"t":"11. To accelerate the transformation of large-scale irrigated agriculture as a strategic pillar of national  food  security  and  economic  growth,  the  Government  will  operationalize  the  Galana Kulalu Food Security Project. The Project, gazetted in 2025 as a Special Economic Zone (SEZ), prioritizes the attraction of private investment, expansion of irrigated acreage to 6,400 acres by June  2026,  and  fast-tracking  of  critical  infrastructure  to  support  modern,  climate-resilient farming systems. Over the medium term, the Government will undertake construction of a major dam to enable irrigation of up to 200,000 acres, with the objective of producing an estimated 14 million bags of maize annually, sufficient to eliminate the national maize deficit, stabilize food prices, reduce import dependence, and conserve foreign exchange. The project will also promote agro-industrial development, create employment opportunities, and stimulate inclusive economic  growth  in  Kilifi,  Tana  River,  and  across  the  country.  To  complement  large-scale irrigation, the Government will promote block farming models to enable aggregation of small and fragmented land holdings, improve mechanization efficiency, and enhance youth participation in agriculture, particularly for those without access to individual land ownership."},{"p":12,"t":"12. Recognizing that climate variability and market risks pose significant threats to agricultural livelihoods, the Government will expand agricultural insurance coverage across the country. The scheme will cover strategic crops, including maize, potato, wheat, and green grams, providing protection against weather-related shocks and market  price volatility. In addition, the Government  will  expand  and  progressively  nationalize  strategic  market  support  systems, including warehouse receipt systems, across priority crops and regions to strengthen structured markets, reduce post-harvest losses, improve access to credit using stored produce as collateral, and support transition from subsistence to commercially oriented farming."},{"p":12,"t":"13. To promote crop diversification and strengthen high-value agricultural value chains, the Government  targets  the  distribution  of  3.5  million  assorted  fruit  tree  seedlings  nationwide, including date palms for ASAL regions. This includes 2.5 million avocado seedlings, 800,000 coffee seedlings, 120,000 macadamia seedlings, 30,000 coconut seedlings, and 25,000 cashew nut  seedlings.  These  measures  support  a  transition  toward  higher-value  crops  that  generate increased  farmer  incomes  while  expanding  Kenya's  agricul tural  export  base.  In  addition,  to support industrial crop expansion and downstream processing, the Government will produce 95 metric tonnes of edible oil, 22.6 metric tonnes of cotton seed, and 2.25 million palm oil seedlings, strengthening domestic agro-processing capacity and reducing reliance on imported industrial raw materials."},{"p":12,"t":"14. To enhance livestock productivity and disease control, the Government will produce and distribute 3.3 million straws of bull semen and 210,000 straws of goat semen to support genetic improvement programmes. In parallel, 22.7 million cattle will be vaccinated against Foot and Mouth Disease to protect livestock assets and sustain market access. To safeguard milk quality"},{"p":13,"t":"and public health, 12,320 milk handling premises will be inspected and certified, and 306,375 milk samples will be tested nationwide.  In  addition, the Government will promote livestock identification  and  traceability  systems  to  enhance  quality  assurance,  food  safety,  and  market confidence for both domestic and export markets. To support value addition and export growth, investments will be directed toward expanded meat, dairy, and leather processing infrastructure, as well as inspection and certification systems to facilitate access to regional and international markets. These measures, supported by regulatory reforms, agricultural insurance schemes, trade facilitation initiatives, and increased private sector participation, aim to improve competitiveness,  expand  export  volumes,  and  increase  foreign  exchange  earnings  from  the livestock sector."},{"section":"1.2.2 Transforming the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise (MSME) Economy"},{"p":13,"t":"1.2.2 Transforming the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise (MSME) Economy"},{"p":13,"t":"15. The  Micro,  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  (MSME)  sector  remains  the  backbone  of Kenya's economy, accounting for 98 percent of all businesses, providing 84 percent of total employment (approximately 14.9 million jobs), and contributing 40 percent to GDP. The sector spans informal home-based enterprises, artisans, mechanics, tailors, carpenters, fabricators, and medium-sized formal enterprises. Despite this central role, MSMEs face structural constraints, including limited access to affordable credit, punitive collateral requirements, high interest rates averaging 18 percent, restrictive licensing frameworks, inadequate infrastructure, weak market linkages, and low technical and managerial capacity. To address market access and financing constraints, the Government will strengthen cooperative development across sectors to serve as primary production, aggregation, marketing, and financial intermediation platforms for MSMEs."},{"p":13,"t":"16. The Government is addressing these constraints through an integrated approach encompassing financial inclusion, regulatory reforms, infrastructure development, market access facilitation, and enterprise capacity building. To create a more conducive business environment, the  Government prioritizes the review of the Micro and Small Enterprises Act to streamline regulatory requirements and reduce barriers to formalization. In addition, the Government will progressively  nationalize  one-stop  MSME  formalization  services  to  enhance  convenience, reduce compliance costs, and improve accessibility for enterprises across all counties."},{"p":13,"t":"17. To deepen financial inclusion and provide affordable credit to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises  (MSMEs),  the  Government  remains  focused  on  scaling  up  the  Hustler  Fund  to disburse KSh 100 billion, reaching 30 million Kenyans including informal sector workers, small traders, and entrepreneurs who have historically been excluded from formal financial services. As part of this process, the Government disbursed KSh 72 billion through the Financial Inclusion Fund and KSh 4.86 billion in industrial credit via Stawi and Inua Biashara between 2022 and 2025,  creating  thousands  of  jobs  in  manufacturing  and  value-added  agricultural  processing. Complementing this, the Credit Guarantee Scheme will be expanded to facilitate KSh 50 billion in commercial bank lending to over 200,000 enterprises. By providing partial risk guarantees to financial institutions, the Scheme unlocks bank credit for MSMEs that possess viable business ideas but lack traditional collateral. The Government will strengthen linkages between Kenya Industrial  Estates  (KIE)  financing  products  and  the  Credit  Guarantee  Scheme  to  enhance affordability and accelerate credit uptake by MSMEs. Further, NYOTA beneficiaries will be linked to complementary financial interventions including the Hustler Fund, Uwezo Fund, and KIE financing windows to support enterprise graduation and financial up-scaling."},{"p":13,"t":"18. In addition, to deepen financial inclusion among MSMEs, the Government launched the Women Entrepreneurs Finance Code in December 2025 and is implementing Kenya's National Financial  Inclusion  Strategy  (2025 -2028).  The  Strategy  goes  beyond  expanding  access  to improve financial health and outcomes for MSMEs, women, youth, and rural populations. The Women Entrepreneurs Finance Code seeks to expand institutions working to close the financing gap for  women  entrepreneurs.  Implementation  of  these  initiatives  is  expected  to  consolidate"},{"p":14,"t":"gains  in  the  financial  sector,  leverage  technology  and  stakeholder  synergy,  and  support Government measures to transform the MSME economy. The Government will also develop MSME-specific financial products within the Hustler Fund framework and align public MSME financing programmes to evolving enterprise realities, including digitalization, green production standards,  global  value  chain  participation,  and  changing  global  market  trends.  In  addition, linkages will be established between MSME financing programmes, including the Hustler Fund and KIE, and the national Warehouse Receipt System to support asset-backed lending, improve working capital access, and strengthen market integration."},{"p":14,"t":"19. To  strengthen  cooperative  movements  and  enhance  enterprise  bargaining  power,  the Government will prioritize enactment of the Cooperative Societies Act and scale up targeted investments  in  cooperative  value-addition  infrastructure  across  agriculture,  manufacturing, trade, and service sectors. Strategic investments will be made in value-addition infrastructure for dairy, cotton, and coffee cooperatives to enable producers to capture higher value along supply chains.  To  enhance  access  to  business  development  support  services,  the  Government  will continue to establish MSME development hubs in all forty-seven counties. These hubs will offer entrepreneurs access to business mentorship, technical training, market intelligence, and linkages to  both  domestic  and  export  markets.  Through  continuous  capacity  building  initiatives  and provision  of  decent  workspaces,  these  hubs  will  enable  MSMEs  to  transition  from  informal operations to competitive, formalized enterprises."},{"p":14,"t":"20. Significant progress has been made in the implementation of these interventions. Between 2022 and 2024, foreign direct investment tripled from USD 463 million to USD 1.5 billion. Over 300,000  new  businesses  were  registered.  As  of  December  2024,  KSh  6.43  billion  had  been advanced to 4,198 MSMEs across the country through the Credit Guarantee Scheme, supporting 26,714 jobs. Business registration was reformed, reducing processing time from 14 days to 24 hours and costs from KSh 10,950 to KSh 5,000. The Women Enterprise Fund disbursed KSh 3.12 billion to 261,681 entrepreneurs with average loan size of KSh 11,942. Industrial skills training reached 251,077 individuals while over 500 new standards were developed. Over 50,000 MSMEs were registered and 174,165 community self-help groups formed."},{"section":"1.2.3 Healthcare"},{"p":14,"t":"1.2.3 Healthcare"},{"p":14,"t":"21. Achieving Universal Health Coverage (UHC) remains a cornerstone of the Government's social policy under the Bottom-Up Economic Transformation Agenda BETA framework, aimed at ensuring equitable access to quality health services for all Kenyans. Over the medium term, the  Government  plans  to  complete  enrolment  of  all  eligible  Kenyans  in  the  Social  Health Authority,  targeting  35  million  people.  The  Government  also  intends  to  expand  Primary Healthcare  Networks  in  all  forty-seven  counties,  integrating  community  health  units,  health centers, and hospitals into coordinated systems that provide a continuum of care. These networks promote  effective  referrals  and  integrated  community-based  care.  Infrastructure  investments include construction of new health facilities, equipping existing facilities with modern medical equipment,  and  full  rehabilitation  of  hospitals.  To  reduce  dependence  on  overseas  medical referrals,  the  Government  will  continue  to  prioritize  establishing  cancer  treatment  centers, cardiac catheterization laboratories, and renal dialysis centers providing Kenyans with advanced medical care within the country."},{"p":14,"t":"22. Community health  services  will  be  strengthened  through  expansion  of  the  Community Health Promoter workforce to 120,000 CHPs receiving monthly stipends, ensuring at least two CHPs  serve  each  community  health  unit.  The  Government  remains  focused  on  addressing unequal  distribution  of  healthcare  personnel  through  targeted  recruitment  and  deployment strategies, with particular focus on underserved rural areas. These interventions will enhance human resource capacity across the health system."},{"p":15,"t":"To  strengthen financial resilience and sustainability,  the  Government  commits  to implementing financing reforms through the Social Health Insurance Fund, Primary Healthcare Fund,  and  Emergency  Chronic  and  Critical  Illness  Fund.  Financial  sustainability  will  be enhanced by retaining funds at the facility level and ring-fencing resources for Health Products and Technologies. These reforms will improve maternal and child health outcomes and enhance supply chain management systems."},{"p":15,"t":"Digitalization of health services is a central focus to improve efficiency, transparency, and coordination across facilities. The Government will continue to implement digital health systems including  claims  management,  supply  chain  management,  and  integrated  health  information systems.  These  digital  platforms  will  enhance  service  delivery  coordination  and  strengthen accountability across the healthcare system."},{"p":15,"t":"25. Between 2022 and 2025, the Government implemented strategic interventions to strengthen primary  healthcare, expand  health infrastructure, improve  service delivery,  and ensure sustainable financing. A key achievement is the enrolment of over 27 million Kenyans in the Social Health Authority by 2025, representing more than 200 percent growth from fewer than 9 million  under NHIF,  with over 21 million entirely new members. The Government has also deployed  107,831  Community  Health  Promoters  supporting  8.8  million  households  and established  228  Primary  Care  Networks,  sponsored  approximately  2.49  million  vulnerable households; and established 228 Primary Healthcare Networks (PHCNs) across all 47 counties, out of a target of 315 networks. These networks integrate community health units, dispensaries, health centres, and hospitals, facilitating seamless referrals, continuity of care, and coordinated health service delivery. Disease control achievements include 89 percent tuberculosis treatment success, 80 percent immunization coverage, and 1.4 million people on antiretroviral therapy. Kenya BioVax Institute achieved 90 percent completion while KEMRI developed 638 research proposals and published 1,501 papers."},{"section":"1.2.4 Housing and Settlement"},{"p":15,"t":"1.2.4 Housing and Settlement"},{"p":15,"t":"26. The Affordable Housing Programme (AHP) is a central pillar of the Bottom-Up Economic Transformation Agenda (BETA), aimed at expanding access to decent and affordable housing for low- and middle-income households, reducing the national housing deficit, and stimulating broad-based economic growth through construction-led employment and industrial development. For this reason, the Government will continue to implement affordable, social and institutional housing programmes through diversified models including public-private partnerships, tenant purchase schemes, and social housing programs."},{"p":15,"t":"To support local construction capacity and reduce housing costs, the Government targets to establish 15 Constituency Appropriate Building Materials and Technologies (ABMTs) centres. These centres will promote use of locally-sourced, climate-appropriate building materials and provide technical training in modern construction methods. Additionally, 506 markets will be constructed to  enhance  commercial infrastructure and support local economic activities. The Government will further continue to support development of satellite cities and implement urban renewal programs in major urban areas to decongest existing urban centers and create planned, liveable communities with integrated infrastructure and amenities."},{"p":15,"t":"To increase access to housing finance the Government will: i) Scale up capitalization of the Housing  Fund;  ii)  Expand  the  Boma  Yangu  affordable  mortgage  product;  iii)  Partner  with financial  institutions  to  provide  long-term,  low-interest  mortgages;  and  iv)  Disburse  KSh  1 billion in rural housing loans to underserved areas. The Kenya Mortgage Refinance Company (KMRC) has been pivotal in this process, disbursing  KSh 21.4 billion by August 2025, and unlocking  over  4,500  affordable  home  loans  across  39  counties.  Reduced  interest  rates  for refinanced mortgages (10 percent vs. commercial average of 16.2 percent in 2024) have made homeownership more affordable for low- and middle-income households."},{"p":16,"t":"Between 2022 and 2025, progress has been realized in provision of affordable houses under the Affordable Housing Programme. Currently, 214,057 housing units are under construction across  all  47  counties,  marking  significant  progress  toward  national  housing  objectives. Completed units include: 605 units in Bondeni; 1,080 units in Mukuru; 110 units in Homabay; and 390 institutional units across various counties. Ongoing projects include: 83,044 affordable units (32 percent completion); 44,803 social housing units (17 percent completion); and 11,527 institutional  units  (22  percent  completion).  To  date,  1,189  units  have  been  handed  over  to beneficiaries.  Additional  progress  includes  packaging  178,000  student  beds  for  universities, TVETs, and KMTCs, with 74,000 under construction. Market infrastructure expansion includes: 44 markets completed (including 10 market sheds, 30 ESP markets, and 4 modern markets); 276 modern markets  under  development,  with  another  175  at  early  stages;  and  an  additional  34 modern and 205 ESP markets under construction at approximately 48 percent completion."},{"p":16,"t":"30. The Affordable Housing Programme has generated over 428,000 jobs, up from 17,744 in 2022 to 330,000 by 2025, with employment projected to reach 1 million by 2026. Jobs span across technical and professional fields, including masons, carpenters, electricians, plumbers, architects,  engineers,  surveyors,  and  real  estate  specialists,  as  well  as  thousands  of  MSMEs engaged in fittings, fabrication, and interior works."},{"section":"1.2.5 Digital Superhighway and Creative Economy"},{"p":16,"t":"1.2.5 Digital Superhighway and Creative Economy"},{"section":"1.2.5.1 Digital Superhighway"},{"p":16,"t":"1.2.5.1 Digital Superhighway"},{"p":16,"t":"Digital  transformation  is  central  to  Kenya's  strategy  for  competitiveness  in  the  Fourth Industrial Revolution. The Government views digital connectivity and literacy as core national infrastructure  equivalent  to  roads,  water,  and  electricity,  essential  for  access  to  education, healthcare,  finance,  markets,  public  services,  and  emerging  digital  opportunities.  Under  this pillar, the Government is prioritizing the development of digital infrastructure including fiber optic  networks  and  data  centres,  connectivity  expansion  ensuring  universal  and  affordable access, digital skills development, e-government platforms and enhancing service delivery, and youth empowerment and the growth of the creative economy."},{"p":16,"t":"Recognizing that digital infrastructure underpins modern economic competitiveness, the Government will install 37,645 kilometers of backbone fiber optic network, extending highspeed internet connectivity to underserved rural and remote areas. Internet connectivity will be provided to 18,680 public institutions nationwide, while 27,516 public Wi-Fi hotspots will be installed to expand affordable internet access to communities across the country. The JamboTel secure  communication  system  will  be  deployed  to  all  government  institutions,  enhancing coordination and reducing communication costs."},{"p":16,"t":"Human capital development for the digital economy will be accelerated through training programs  that  will  equip  one  million  young  Kenyans  with  digital  skills  including  software coding, digital marketing, and online freelancing. To support this, the Government targets to establish 100 digital hubs equipped with computers and high-speed internet. These hubs will provide  youth  and  entrepreneurs  with  infrastructure  necessary  to  develop  digital  skills  and establish technology-based businesses."},{"p":16,"t":"To modernize public service delivery, the Government targets to automate 100 percent of Government services, enabling citizens to access services efficiently through digital platforms. Safeguarding this digital infrastructure requires robust cybersecurity frameworks. The Government  seeks  to  complete  the  National  Cybersecurity  Agency,  the  National  Security Operations  Centre,  and  seven  Sectoral  Security  Operation  Centers  to  protect  critical  digital infrastructure.  Data  controllers  and  data  processors  will  be  registered,  and  public  awareness campaigns on data protection will be carried out to ensure responsible data management."},{"p":17,"t":"35. Significant progress has already been  made  in  strengthening  digital infrastructure nationwide. From 2022 to 2025, digital transformation accelerated with 24,000 kilometers of fiber optic cable added, expanding total infrastructure to 80,633 kilometers. This comprise of 30,454  kilometres  of  public  sector  fibre  up  from  22,486  kilometres  in  2022  and  50,179 kilometres  of  private  sector  fibre,  reflecting  substantial  investment  in  nationwide  broadband capacity.  Under  the  National  Optic  Fibre  Backbone,  7,152  kilometres  of  fibre  have  been installed, connecting 82 hospitals and 1,114 public institutions to high-speed internet."},{"p":17,"t":"36. To support widespread access and digital inclusion, the Government established 404 digital hubs and distributed 21,372 devices to enhance digital access and expand training opportunities. In addition, 1,578 JiConnect public Wi-Fi hotspots have been rolled out in markets, town centres, bus stages, and public facilities, growing from zero hotspots in 2022 to nearly 1,500 by 2025. This  increased  internet  penetration  increased  to  over  90  percent  with  mobile  subscriptions reaching over 60 million. These investments are helping to bridge the digital divide and create vibrant  community-level  digital  ecosystems  that  support  learning,  entrepreneurship,  and innovation. To modernize public service delivery, over 17,668 services were on-boarded onto the  e-Citizen  platform  from  over  350  agencies.  Monthly  government  collections  through  eCitizen have increased from KSh 1.45 billion in 2022 to KSh 8.2 billion in 2025."},{"p":17,"t":"37. To  safeguard  this  digital  backbone,  the  Government  has  operationalized  the  National Cybersecurity Agency, the National Security Operations Centre, and seven Sectoral Security Operations  Centres.  These  institutions  strengthen  digital  security,  enhance  real-time  threat detection, and ensure the resilience of critical Government systems. Ongoing initiatives include registering all data controllers and processors and intensifying public awareness campaigns on data privacy and responsible data handling."},{"p":17,"t":"38. Human capital development for the digital economy has registered strong gains. Nearly two million individuals have received digital skills training since 2022, including 1,556,561 youth trained under the Ajira Digital Programme and 1,893,914 trained through broader digital literacy initiatives. The Jitume Programme has enrolled 4,147 trainees and provided specialised digital training  to  14,611  young  people.  Youth  digital  employment  has  risen  sharply:  combined employment under Ajira Digital and Jitume increased from 99,071 young people in 2022 to 297,866 in 2025, an additional 198,795 youth, representing over 200 percent growth. Overall, more  than  300,000  young  Kenyans  now  earn  income  online  through  Ajira,  Jitume,  and  the expanding Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) sector."},{"section":"1.2.5.2 Creative Economy"},{"p":17,"t":"1.2.5.2 Creative Economy"},{"p":17,"t":"39. The creative  economy in  Kenya has  emerged  as  a  key  driver  of  economic  growth,  job creation,  and  youth  empowerment,  encompassing  sectors  such  as  film,  music,  fashion,  arts, media, digital content, and design. Over the past several years, significant progress has been made  in  enhancing  skills  development,  infrastructure,  and  market  access.  The  Government, through agencies such as the Kenya Film Commission (KFC), National Arts Council (NAC), and the Ministry of Sports, Culture and Heritage, has facilitated capacity building programs, providing  training  in  entrepreneurship,  technical  skills,  and  business  management.  Notably, between  2020  and  2025,  over  240,000  young  people  received  training  in  business  and entrepreneurship skills, while guidance on career development and financial literacy reached more than 1.1 million youth nationwide through empowerment centres."},{"p":17,"t":"40. Infrastructure and production capacity have been strengthened through investment in film production studios, cultural centres, innovation hubs, and exhibition platforms, enabling creative professionals to showcase and commercialize their work. The Government has also supported access to finance for creative enterprises, including grants, venture funds, and incentives for partnerships  with  private  investors.  Regulatory  reforms  under  the  Copyright  Act,  2001,  and"},{"p":18,"t":"subsequent  amendments  have  enhanced  intellectual  property  protection,  while  programs promoting digital content creation and distribution have expanded market reach both locally and internationally."},{"p":18,"t":"Planned reforms over the medium term aim to consolidate these achievements and further position the creative economy as a driver of industrial growth and employment under the BETA framework. These include expanding specialized skills training in areas such as digital media, animation, fashion design, music production, and gaming, with a focus on youth and women entrepreneurs. The Government will enhance market access through export promotion programs, trade  fairs,  and  digital  marketplaces,  while strengthening intellectual property protection and enforcement to incentivize innovation. Financing mechanisms for creative enterprises will be scaled  up,  including  the  introduction  of  creative  economy  credit  facilities,  blended  finance instruments, and public-private partnerships. Additionally, reforms will focus on strengthening policy coordination and institutional capacity, including the Kenya Film Commission, National Arts Council, and County cultural departments, to ensure coherent support for creative clusters and innovation hubs."},{"section":"1.3 Enablers"},{"p":18,"t":"1.3 Enablers"},{"p":18,"t":"42. Realization of the Government's Bottom Up Economic Transformation Agenda requires a robust enabling environment anchored on strategic cross-cutting interventions. The Government is committed to continue to strengthen implementation of critical enablers providing the  infrastructure,  institutional  frameworks,  and  capacity  necessary  for  sustainable  economic transformation. These enablers constitute the foundational systems through  which the Government seeks to create an enabling ecosystem for private sector growth, enhance service delivery, and ensure equitable access to opportunities across all regions and communities:"},{"section":"1.3.1 Infrastructure"},{"p":18,"t":"1.3.1 Infrastructure"},{"p":18,"t":"Infrastructure development constitutes the physical backbone to enable  economic transformation. It provides essential connectivity for movement of people, goods, and services, reliable  energy  supply  powering  productive  activities,  accessible  water  resources  supporting agriculture and human  settlements, and sustainable management  of  natural resources. Infrastructure investments reduce transaction costs, open new markets, and facilitate movement of  goods  and  people.  For  this  reason,  using  both  public  procurement  and  Public  Private Partnerships (PPPs) frameworks, the Government will intensify investments in: construction of water pans, small, large and mega dams and associated irrigation infrastructure; expansion of roads and transport network, clean energy generation and distribution capacity; exploration and commercialization of oil and gas. A total of 10 PPP projects are under implementation: Nairobi Expressway, Nairobi-Nakuru Mau Summit Highway, Road Annuity Projects (Lot 33, 15 and 18),  Menengai  Geothermal  Power  Plant  projects  (Sosian,  Quantum  &  Orpower22),  Galana Kulalu Food Security Project, and Kenya Defence Forces Residential Accommodation Project."},{"section":"1.3.1.1 Water and Irrigation"},{"p":18,"t":"1.3.1.1 Water and Irrigation"},{"p":18,"t":"44. The Government is committed to ensure universal access to clean and safe water, improve sanitation, enhance national water storage capacity, and expand irrigation to strengthen water security  and  food  production.  National  water  coverage  has  expanded  significantly,  with approximately additional six million people can now access clean and safe water. The Karimenu II Bulk Water Supply System, with a treatment capacity of 70,000 cubic metres per day, and the Northern Collector Water Diversion Tunnel, with a capacity of 140,000 cubic metres per day, have been successfully operationalized, significantly enhancing water availability to urban and peri-urban areas. Over the medium term, 23 towns and 120 schools have been connected to water"},{"p":19,"t":"services and under the Kenya Towns Programme, an additional 13 towns have been connected to water services, expanding access to safe water for households, educational institutions, and communities. To increase water storage, the Yamo Dam in Samburu County has been completed with a capacity of 1.2 million cubic metres, while construction of Thwake Dam has progressed to 94 percent completion. Additionally, 135 small dams and water pans have been constructed across the country, collectively providing over 2.7 million cubic metres of surface water storage, enhancing  local  water  resilience.  Further,  seven  exploratory  boreholes  have  been  drilled  in ASAL counties to generate groundwater data, supporting water resource planning in arid and semi-arid regions."},{"p":19,"t":"To improve sanitation across the country, 13 towns have been connected to sewer systems, and 150 low-cost, safe pit latrines have been constructed alongside human waste recycling plants, enhancing hygiene and promoting sustainable waste management. Monitoring and management of water resources have been enhanced through the rehabilitation of 54 river gauging stations and the upgrading of 10 manual stations to telemetry systems, allowing for real-time monitoring of river water levels."},{"p":19,"t":"The Government has continued to strengthen the irrigation investment in the country by bringing  an  additional  108,210  acres  under  irrigation  through  community-managed  and smallholder projects. In this regard, irrigation water storage capacity has been expanded by 42 million cubic metres, enabling the irrigation of 28,000 acres of land across the country. The infrastructure works including water reservoirs and canals at the Galana Kulalu Food Security Project have been built and are undergoing final testing. In addition, 20 public schools have been equipped  with  micro-irrigation  systems,  including  boreholes,  greenhouses,  and  raised  water tanks, facilitating the production of horticultural and fruit seedlings and promoting agricultural education among students."},{"section":"1.3.1.2 Roads and Bridges"},{"p":19,"t":"1.3.1.2 Roads and Bridges"},{"p":19,"t":"The Government targets to prioritize construction and rehabilitation of road infrastructure to enhance connectivity across the country. This includes construction of 1,891 kilometres of roads, rehabilitation of 515 kilometres of roads, and periodic maintenance of 1,224 kilometres of  roads.  Additionally,  78,320  kilometres  of  roads  will  receive  routine  maintenance,  while 10,153  kilometres  will  be  maintained  under  Performance  Management  contracts.  These investments will link major economic centres through trunk roads. County roads will connect rural areas to markets, while rural access roads will open agricultural zones to trade."},{"p":19,"t":"To expand and modernize the national road and transport system, the Government has, over the last three years, implemented extensive infrastructure development and policy reforms across the sector. In the roads sector, the Government has constructed 1,798.25 kilometres of new roads, rehabilitated an additional 305.87 kilometres, and undertaken routine maintenance on 102,561.61  kilometres  to  ensure  improved  road  condition  and  connectivity.  Further,  2,111.3 kilometres  underwent  periodic  maintenance,  while  28,844.55  kilometres  were  maintained through  Performance-Based  Contracts  to  enhance  efficiency,  accountability,  and  long-term sustainability of road networks."},{"p":19,"t":"To improve transport system, the Government has completed construction of the Miritini MGR Station, Mombasa Terminus, including a new metre-gauge railway link and a railway bridge across the Makupa Causeway, providing seamless first- and last-mile connectivity for SGR passengers. To strengthen policy and regulatory frameworks, the Government developed the  National  E-Mobility  Policy  to  guide  the  transition  to  clean  and  sustainable  transport technologies,  the  National  Road  Safety  Action  Plan  (2024 -2025)  to  enhance  safety  across transport  corridors,  and  the  National  Logistics  and  Freight  Strategy  for  horticulture  exports,"},{"p":20,"t":"alongside  the  Naivasha  Dry  Port  Masterplan,  to  improve  logistics  performance  and  regional competitiveness."},{"section":"1.3.1.3 Electricity"},{"p":20,"t":"1.3.1.3 Electricity"},{"p":20,"t":"50. The  Government  will  continue  to  expand  energy  infrastructure  to  achieve  100  percent electricity connectivity over the medium term. This goal will be realized through the Last Mile Connectivity Programme, the deployment of off-grid solar solutions in remote areas, and the development  of  renewable  energy  mini-grids.  To  meet  rising  demand,  the  Government  will increase national power generation capacity by an additional 10,000 megawatts (MW) through geothermal,  wind,  solar,  and  hydroelectric  projects.  This  expansion  is  designed  to  support growing industrial activity and drive sustained economic growth. Reliable and affordable energy supply remains central to powering manufacturing, promoting agricultural value addition, and enabling digital transformation across all sectors of the economy."},{"p":20,"t":"51. To enhance energy access, reliability, and sustainability, the Government has increased the national installed power generation capacity by 160 MW, raising total capacity from 3,076 MW to  3,236  MW.  To  strengthen  electricity  transmission  and  distribution,  405  kilometres  of transmission  lines  were  constructed,  alongside  5  new  high-voltage  substations,  1,321.9 kilometres of medium-voltage distribution lines, and 20 medium-voltage distribution substations. To expand access in off-grid and underserved regions, the Government constructed five new hybrid mini-grids and installed 169,494 Standalone Solar Home Systems, improving clean energy uptake and supporting rural development. A total of 1,185,481 new customers were connected to electricity, including 2,082 public facilities such as schools, health centres, and administrative offices, while 27,027 street lighting points were installed to enhance safety and support 24-hour economies."},{"p":20,"t":"52. To improve system efficiency, reliability, and value for money in electricity supply, the Government will implement targeted measures to reduce transmission losses across the national grid.  These  measures  include  the  rehabilitation  and  modernization  of  transmission  assets, expansion of high-voltage transmission lines and substations, and implementation of an updated Transmission  Master  Plan  to  align  network  development  with  projected  demand.  The Government will also revise the Grid Code to strengthen technical and operational standards, modernize system control and real-time monitoring infrastructure, and enhance coordination of generation, transmission, and distribution investments. These reforms will be supported by clear performance targets  to  ensure  efficient  power  evacuation,  reduce  losses,  and  deliver  reliable electricity to consumers."},{"p":20,"t":"53. To  promote  clean  cooking  and  sustainable  energy,  the  Government  facilitated  the construction of eight institutional biogas plants and 621 domestic biogas units, and subsidized 14,071 clean cookstoves to reduce reliance on biomass and improve household health outcomes."},{"section":"1.3.1.4 Petroleum and E-mobility"},{"p":20,"t":"1.3.1.4 Petroleum and E-mobility"},{"section":"Petroleum"},{"p":20,"t":"Petroleum"},{"p":20,"t":"54. In the exploration of oil and gas, the Government reconstituted and reconfigured the Kenya Petroleum Exploration Block Map to 50 blocks, in line with recommendations from the FY 2021/22 study. Data packages and atlases for Blocks 9, L8, and L4 were finalized to enhance investor readiness. In addition, ten petroleum blocks were marketed at the 11th East African Petroleum  Conference  and  Exhibition  (EAPCE'25)  held  in  Dar  es  Salaam  to  attract  new investment  and  strengthen  regional  cooperation.  The  Government  also  undertook  a  series  of stakeholder engagement and public participation forums in West Pokot and Turkana Counties, and completed a survey for the full length of the proposed crude oil pipeline. Geoscientific data"},{"p":21,"t":"acquisition was conducted in Block L18, covering an area of 1,025 km², to advance exploration activities.  In  support  of  the  development  of  the  South  Lokichar  Oil  Field,  the  Government prepared a land acquisition plan for the crude oil pipeline corridor, identified a feasible make-up water pipeline route, and conducted disclosure meetings along the proposed corridor."},{"p":21,"t":"55. The  Environment  and  Social  Impact  Assessment  (ESIA)  for  the  water  pipeline  was completed  and  submitted  to  NEMA.  Further,  the  government  reviewed  the  Upstream  Water Framework  Agreement  (UWFA)  and  carried  out  stakeholder  engagements  and  community sensitization  activities  to  ensure  local  participation  and  compliance  with  environmental  and social safeguards."},{"p":21,"t":"56. To strengthen the regulatory environment, the Draft Petroleum (Liquefied Petroleum Gas) Regulations, 2024 and the Draft National Petroleum Policy, 2024 were finalized and are awaiting gazettement."},{"section":"E-Mobility"},{"p":21,"t":"E-Mobility"},{"p":21,"t":"57. The  e-mobility  subsector  is  emerging  as  a  strategic  area  for  Kenya's  green  growth, industrialization,  and  transport  modernization  agenda.  Progress  has  been  recorded  in  the adoption of electric motorcycles, buses, and light commercial vehicles in urban centers such as Nairobi,  Mombasa,  and  Kisumu.  The  Government,  through  the  Ministry  of  Transport  and Infrastructure  and  partnerships  with  County  Governments,  has  supported  pilot  programs  for electric buses in public transport fleets, promoting cleaner urban mobility and reducing reliance on fossil fuels."},{"p":21,"t":"58. Efforts to develop charging infrastructure have begun in key urban corridors, including private sector-led installations at malls, commercial centers, and industrial parks. Policy support has also been provided through tax incentives, reduced import duties for electric vehicles (EVs), and  promotion  of  public-private  partnerships  to  stimulate  investment  in  local  assembly  and distribution. Kenya has also partnered with regional and international development agencies to access technical assistance, financing, and  knowledge-sharing  for  EV  deployment  and sustainable transport solutions."},{"p":21,"t":"59. Planned reforms aim to accelerate e-mobility adoption, strengthen local value chains, and enhance environmental sustainability. Key interventions include: i) development and implementation of comprehensive Electric Vehicles (EV) policies, standards for vehicle safety, charging  infrastructure,  and  interoperability;  ii)  continued  provision  of  tax  incentives,  duty exemptions,  and  financing  schemes  to  encourage  uptake  of  electric  vehicles  by  individuals, businesses, and public transport operators; iii) promotion of l ocal assembly of EVs, batteries, and  components,  leveraging  industrial  parks  and  export-oriented  manufacturing  zones;  iv) expansion  of  nationwide  EV  charging  networks,  including  fast-charging  stations  along highways, urban centres, and industrial clusters; v) training programs for engineers, technicians, and  operators  in  EV  maintenance,  battery  management,  and  green  transport  solutions;  vi) encouraging use of renewable energy sources (solar and wind) to power EV charging stations, reducing carbon emissions and support ing Kenya's climate goals; vii) scaling up deployment of electric  buses,  shuttles,  and  light  commercial  vehicles  in  urban  transport  fleets,  aligned  with urban decongestion and environmental sustainability initiatives; and viii) implementing a Green Port Policy at Mombasa to introduce climatefriendly technologies and ensure the ports' long -term resilience against global trade disruptions."},{"section":"1.3.2 Manufacturing Sector"},{"p":21,"t":"1.3.2 Manufacturing Sector"},{"p":21,"t":"60. The Government continues to prioritize the development of manufacturing as a key enabler of economic growth, job creation, and industrialization. Efforts have been placed to strengthen local  value  chain  through  backward  and  forward  linkages  to  enhance  productivity  and"},{"p":22,"t":"competitiveness  in  the  export  market.  The  Government  has  also  implemented  targeted interventions to improve industrial infrastructure, including industrial parks, special economic zones,  and  access  to  reliable  power  and  transport  networks,  ensuring  that  raw  materials, intermediate goods, and finished products move efficiently along the value chain. Key value chains targeted include agro-processing, leather and leather products, building and construction materials, textiles and apparel, dairy products, edible and crop oils, tea and coffee, and sugar. The Government has implemented and or plans to implement the following initiatives under each value chain:"},{"section":"1.3.2.1 Agro-Processing"},{"p":22,"t":"1.3.2.1 Agro-Processing"},{"p":22,"t":"61. To enhance productivity, reduce input costs, minimize post-harvest losses, and promote value addition, the Government, in collaboration with County Governments, has initiated the development of County Aggregation and Industrial Parks (CAIPs). The Government plans to construct 47 CAIPs, one in each county. In the first phase, 13 CAIPs have been developed and are  fully  operational,  while  construction  of  the  remaining  34  parks  will  be  undertaken  in subsequent phases, with completion targeted by 2027. These facilities serve as strategic hubs for aggregation, processing, storage, and market access, supporting the modernization of agriculture and the strengthening of county-level value chains."},{"p":22,"t":"62. In addition, the Government  will  continue to strengthen support for agricultural cooperatives and producer organizations to invest in value addition and agro-processing through improved access to finance, technical assistance, and market linkages. This includes facilitating cooperative access to affordable credit through financial institutions, including the Cooperative Bank  of  Kenya  and  other  commercial  and  development  finance  institutions,  supported  by targeted credit guarantee schemes and blended finance instruments. The Government will also support  cooperatives  through  capacity-building  in  governance,  financial  management,  and business  development,  alongside  the  provision  of  common-user  processing  facilities,  cold storage,  and  quality  assurance  infrastructure  within  CAIPs.  These  measures  aim  to  enhance cooperative competitiveness, increase farmer incomes, and expand participation of smallholder producers in domestic and export markets."},{"section":"1.3.2.2 Leather and Leather Products"},{"p":22,"t":"1.3.2.2 Leather and Leather Products"},{"p":22,"t":"63. The  leather  subsector  is  a  strategic  component  of  Kenya's  manufacturing  and  export ecosystem, leveraging the country's strong livestock base to drive value addition, employment creation, and export diversification. The Government, through the Kenya Leather Development Council  (KLDC),  has  supported  the  establishment  and  upgrading  of  tanneries  and  leather processing  facilities,  particularly  in  key  hubs  such  as  Thika,  Nakuru,  and  Kitui.  Efforts  to formalize  the  sector  have  included  enforcement  of  quality  standards  for  hides  and  skins, strengthening  linkages  between  livestock  producers  and  tanneries,  and  providing  technical support to small and medium leather enterprises. Investment incentives, including duty remission schemes  and  export  facilitation  measures,  have  encouraged  private-sector  participation  and strengthened  domestic  value  addition.  The  sector's  contribution  to  manufacturing  GDP  and employment has further been supported through targeted training programmes, particularly for youth and artisans in leather product design and production."},{"p":22,"t":"64. Over  the  medium  term,  the  Government  will  scale  up  industrial  competitiveness  and exports of leather and leather products through a comprehensive value-chain approach. Planned reforms  include  strengthening  backward  linkages  by  improving  collection,  preservation,  and grading  of  hides  and  skins  at  farm  and  slaughterhouse  levels;  expanding  domestic  tanning, finishing, and manufacturing capacity; promoting local value addition for footwear, garments, and leather accessories; and enforcing robust quality, environmental, and occupational standards"},{"p":23,"t":"in line with international requirements. To anchor large-scale leather manufacturing and exportoriented production, the Government will operationalize the Kenanie Leather Industrial Park that is expected to significantly boost local manufacturing of leather products, create over 100,000 jobs, and inject approximately KSh 120 billion into the economy. In addition, the Government will facilitate access to finance and technical skills for leather SMEs, enhance market access through  trade  promotion  and  participation  in  regional  and  international  leather  expos,  and leverage export incentive frameworks to expand Kenya's regional and global market share."},{"section":"1.3.2.3 Building and Construction Materials"},{"p":23,"t":"1.3.2.3 Building and Construction Materials"},{"p":23,"t":"65. The  building and construction materials sub-sector has been a key focus under Government's Bottom -Up Economic Transformation Agenda. Government support has included investment  in  capacity  expansion  for  cement,  steel,  roofing,  and  other  building  materials manufacturers. Measures to reduce reliance on imports have been complemented by promotion of  local  content  through  standards  enforcement  and  industrial  incentives.  Local  enterprises producing  tiles,  bricks,  cement,  steel  reinforcement  bars,  and  other  materials  have  received technical  support  and  certification  to  improve  quality.  These  initiatives  have  contributed  to meeting the growing demand from public housing projects and private construction, while also generating employment in manufacturing and distribution chains."},{"p":23,"t":"66. Over the medium term, the Government will continue to implement reforms to enhance domestic production capacity and competitiveness of construction materials. Key interventions include:  promoting  energy-efficient  and  alternative  building  materials  (such  as  interlocking blocks and precast concrete products); strengthening quality assurance through enforcement of Kenya Bureau of Standards (KEBS) regulations; incentivizing adoption of modern manufacturing technologies; supporting SME integration into large-scale housing projects; and facilitating access to finance and technical skills for manufacturers. The sector will also benefit from policies to enhance regional trade and export of building materials, reducing reliance on imports and supporting Kenya's indus trialization and affordable housing goals."},{"section":"1.3.2.4 Textiles and Apparel"},{"p":23,"t":"1.3.2.4 Textiles and Apparel"},{"p":23,"t":"67. The textiles and apparels subsector is a key contributor to Kenya's manufacturing GDP, employment, and export potential. Since 2022, the Government has supported industrial revival and  competitiveness  through  upgrading  existing  textile  factories,  and  promoting  compliance with Kenya Bureau of Standards (KEBS) for quality assurance. Government interventions have included  facilitation  of  duty  remission  and  export  incentives,  support  for  SMEs  in  textile manufacturing,  and  technical  training  programs  for  youth  and  artisans  in  apparel  design, tailoring,  and  production.  These  initiatives  have  contributed  to  sustaining  employment, increasing local value addition, and strengthening backward linkages with the cotton and textile raw material supply chain."},{"p":23,"t":"68. Planned  reforms  over  the  medium  term  aim  to  expand  competitiveness,  promote  local manufacturing, and enhance  export readiness. Key  interventions include: strengthening backward linkages by supporting cotton and fibre production, expanding industrial capacity for spinning, weaving, and garment production, and promoting value addition in finished textiles and apparel. The Government also intends to enhance quality standards, ensure compliance with international textile regulations, and provide targeted technical skills training and financing for SMEs and youth enterprises. Further reforms under the BETA framework include facilitating regional and global market access through trade agreements, supporting industrial clusters and textile  parks,  and  leveraging  public-private  partnerships  to  modernize  production  and  reduce import dependence."},{"section":"1.3.2.5 Dairy Products"},{"p":24,"t":"1.3.2.5 Dairy Products"},{"p":24,"t":"69. The  dairy  subsector  is  a  key  pillar  of  Kenya's  agricultural  economy,  supporting  an estimated 1.8 million  households  and  contributing  significantly to food  security, rural livelihoods, and agro-industrial development. As demand for processed dairy products continues to rise, the Government has prioritized interventions that strengthen the value chain, enhance milk quality, and expand market opportunities for producers and processors. Notable progress has  been  achieved  through  the  modernization  and  expansion  of  New  Kenya  Cooperative Creameries  (New  KCC).  Upgraded  processing  plants  in  major  dairy  regions  have  increased national milk-handling capacity and improved reliability of farmer payments. These investments have also helped stabilize farm-gate prices during periods of surplus production, offering a more predictable market for smallholder farmers."},{"p":24,"t":"To address challenges in milk aggregation and quality control, the Government working with County Governments, has expanded the network of milk collection and cooling centres. These facilities have enhanced cold-chain preservation, reduced post-harvest losses, and enabled producers  to  supply  higher-quality  milk  to  processors.  Complementing  these  efforts  is  the establishment of a camel milk processing facility, which has boosted formal marketing and value addition  for  producers  in  arid  and  semi-arid  areas.  Additionally,  partnerships  with  technical institutions  and  local  fabricators  have  promoted  the  production  of  dairy  machinery  and equipment, reducing costs for small and medium-sized enterprises."},{"p":24,"t":"The  country's  cold -chain  infrastructure  has  further  strengthened  through  public -private investments in bulk milk coolers, chilling units, and refrigerated transport. These improvements have enhanced traceability, supported compliance with quality standards, and broadened access to  regional  markets.  Regulatory  reforms  have  also  progressed,  with  the  Kenya  Dairy  Board continuing to enforce Dairy Industry Regulations and national milk quality standards through inspections, licensing, and compliance monitoring."},{"p":24,"t":"Planned reforms anchored in the Agricultural Sector Transformation and Growth Strategy and the National Dairy Development Strategy, focus on strengthening cooperative governance, implementing national milk quality and safety programmes, scaling up artificial insemination and  breeding  services,  and  expanding  climate-resilient  feed  and  fodder  systems.  Additional reforms  include  deepening  cold-chain  investment  through  Public -Private  Partnerships  and enhancing  extension  and  training  services  to  support  improved  productivity  and  compliance across the value chain."},{"section":"1.3.2.6 Edible and Crop Oils"},{"p":24,"t":"1.3.2.6 Edible and Crop Oils"},{"p":24,"t":"The Government has prioritized the expansion of edible oils and industrial crop production to boost local processing, reduce import dependency, and increase farmer incomes. The area under  edible  oil  crops,  particularly  sunflower,  has  expanded  by  90.6  percent,  from  60,000 hectares in 2022 to 114,350 hectares by April 2025. To support this growth, the Government procured and distributed 556 metric tons of sunflower seeds to farmers across 35 counties and established 15 oil extraction facilities in focus regions."},{"p":24,"t":"Coconut  production  has  also  been  expanded,  with  42,000  seedlings  procured  and distributed to six coastal counties, increasing the area for farming by an additional 625 hectares. To further support industrial crop expansion, the Government will continue to foster a favourable environment for production of 95 metric tonnes of edible oil, 22.6 metric tonnes of cotton seed, and 2.25 million palm seedlings, strengthen domestic processing capacity and reduce reliance on imported industrial raw materials. These measures are aligned with national efforts to enhance value addition, create jobs, and stimulate sustainable agricultural and industrial growth. These"},{"p":25,"t":"interventions have contributed to a reduction in the edible oil import bill by KSh 17 billion, with palm oil imports declining from KSh 114.2 billion in 2022 to KSh 96.8 billion in 2023."},{"section":"1.3.4.7 Tea and Coffee Sub-sectors"},{"p":25,"t":"1.3.4.7 Tea and Coffee Sub-sectors"},{"p":25,"t":"75. The Government remains committed to enhancing the tea and coffee sub-sectors to drive growth,  create  employment,  and  boost  export  competitiveness.  In  the  tea  sub-sector,  the Government  is  focusing  on  value  addition  to  increase  smallholder  farmers'  incomes and strengthen  Kenya's  position  as  Africa's  largest  tea  producer  and  exporter.  The  Government priority is to raise the share of value-added tea exports tenfold to 50 percent by 2027. Value addition practices include packaging, branding, blending, obtaining quality certifications, and producing  flavoured  or  instant  tea  varieties,  which  can  create  jobs  and  increase  smallholder incomes by up to 40 percent compared to traditional black tea."},{"p":25,"t":"76. The Government is undertaking tea reforms to increase income to farmers, strengthen value chain, improve competitiveness in global market and support sustainable growth of the Kenyan tea industry. The reforms include: promoting direct international sales by tea factories; upgrading tea factory infrastructure; tax and regulatory incentives; tea regulatory and quality standards; value  addition  and  diversification;  reforms  of  payments  and  pricing  systems;  and  market expansion and branding."},{"p":25,"t":"77. To expand market access, the Government is engaging in high-level diplomacy to open new export markets, including China and Iran, securing trade  agreements, promoting Kenyan tea products, and supporting domestic processing and export-oriented value chains. The Government is also supporting infrastructure and capacity development including the acquisition of specialized equipment for the incubation center at Embu Town CIDC, which has trained 294 MSMEs  in  advanced  orthodox  tea,  purple tea, and specialty tea production. Factory modernization  efforts  have  upgraded  eight  KTDA-managed  factories  with  orthodox  tea processing lines, while seven cottage tea factories were licensed. As a result, tea production has increased from 535.04 million kilograms in 2022 to 598.47 million kilograms in 2025, a 12 percent  increase,  while  total  export  earnings  rose  from  KSh  138  billion  to  KSh  215  billion. Average earnings per kilogram of green leaf increased by 28 percent, and value-added tea exports grew by 33 percent to 27 million kilograms, supported by VAT exemptions on teas purchased from local factories for value addition."},{"p":25,"t":"78. In the coffee sub-sector, the Government has implemented the Direct Settlement System (DSS) to ensure payments from coffee sales are credited directly to farmers' bank accounts, enhancing transparency and ensuring farmers receive at least 80 percent of the ir coffee's value. The DSS has also enabled co-operative societies to recover loans and reduce indebtedness. The Government  will  continue  to  support  coffee  farmers  through  the  Coffee  Cherry  Advance Revolving Fund, which has already disbursed over KSh 9.7 billion in three years, providing farmers with access to finance while promoting repayment reliability and fostering sustainable production practices."},{"p":25,"t":"79. Agricultural  support  has  resulted  in  a  5.6  percent  expansion  in  the  area  under  coffee cultivation,  from  109,385  hectares  in  2022  to  115,500  hectares  in  2025,  supported  by  the distribution of nearly 50,000 coffee seedlings across four counties. Production has increased modestly  while  the  average  price  for  coffee  cherry  rose  by  52  percent  from  KSh  78.99  per kilogram in 2022 to KSh 120 per kilogram in 2025. Traded volumes and export values also increased  significantly,  with  48,200  metric  tons  valued  at  USD  229.55  million,  representing growth of 11 percent and 23 percent respectively, and exports is projected to reach 60,000 metric tonnes in 2025, with long-term targets of 150,000 metric tonnes."},{"section":"1.3.4.8 Sugar Sub-sector"},{"p":26,"t":"1.3.4.8 Sugar Sub-sector"},{"p":26,"t":"The Government has implemented comprehensive reforms to revitalize the sugar industry, enhance productivity, and improve smallholder farmer incomes. The Sugar Act, 2024 has been fully operationalized, introducing a 4 percent Sugar Development Levy and enabling the leasing of four State-owned sugar mills to private investors. The levy is charged at 4 percent of the exfactory price for locally produced sugar and 4 percent of the Cost, Insurance, and Freight (CIF) value for imported sugar. Proceeds from the levy are earmarked for factory modernization and infrastructure  development,  farmer  support  services,  and  effective  industry  regulation  and administration."},{"p":26,"t":"To strengthen governance, efficiency, product quality, and competitiveness, the Government leased Sony Sugar, Muhoroni, Chemelil, and Nzoia Sugar Mills to private investors. These leases are expected to improve operational efficiency, attract private capital, and safeguard a  combined  installed  milling  capacity  of  11,200  tonnes  of  cane  per  day,  thereby  stabilizing production and protecting farmer livelihoods."},{"p":26,"t":"Following these reforms, the revitalized sugar sector now supports an estimated 250,000 direct  jobs  and  sustains  the  livelihoods  of  approximately six  million  people across the value chain,  including  farming,  milling,  transport,  wholesale,  and  retail  trade.  In  addition,  the implementation of the catchment-area zoning policy has significantly reduced cane poaching and ensured  a  more  predictable  and  reliable  supply  of  cane  to  mills,  contributing  to  improved production planning, higher capacity utilization, and overall sector efficiency."},{"p":26,"t":"The  reforms  have  delivered  measurable  gains  across  farming,  production,  and  market performance.  The  area  under  sugarcane  cultivation  expanded  by  19  percent,  from  242,508 hectares in 2022 to 289,631 hectares by December 2024, representing an increase of 47,123 hectares (approximately 116,500 acres). Over the same period, sugar production increased by 76 percent, from 472,773 metric tonnes to over 815,000 metric tonnes. As a result of increased domestic output, sugar imports declined by approximately 70 percent, reflecting improved selfsufficiency, reduced pressure on foreign exchange, and enhanced stability of the domestic sugar market."},{"section":"1.3.3 Blue Economy"},{"p":26,"t":"1.3.3 Blue Economy"},{"p":26,"t":"The blue economy presents a significant opportunity for Kenya to drive inclusive, climateresilient growth and economic  transformation in line with  the  Bottom-Up  Economic Transformation  Agenda.  By  sustainably  leveraging  marine  and  inland  water  resources,  the Government  aims  to  empower  coastal  and  inland  fishing  communities,  enhance  household incomes, and contribute to national economic growth. In parallel, the Government is advancing policies to promote green shipping, including the adoption of alternative fuels, energy-efficient vessel designs, and digital maritime solutions to improve logistics efficiency. These interventions will reduce emissions, create green jobs, attract sustainable investment, and strengthen economic resilience while supporting Kenya' s climate action commitments."},{"p":26,"t":"The Government has prioritized the modernization and expansion of Kisumu Port as a strategic  intervention  to  strengthen  Kenya's  role  in  East  Africa's  inland  trade  and  logistics network. As a result, cargo throughput increased from 127,000 metric tonnes in 2023 and an estimated 400,000 metric tonnes by the end of 2025. The Government will sustain this growth trajectory to expand regional trade, deepen economic integration, and unlock new opportunities across the Lake Victoria Basin. Further, the commissioning of the MV Mpungu, a 96-metre cargo vessel  with  a  capacity  of  1,000  tonnes,  marks  a  major  milestone  in  advancing  inland  water transport.  The  vessel  provides  roll-on/roll-off  services  for  wheeled  cargo,  removing  the equivalent of 22 trucks per trip from regional roads, thereby improving trade efficiency, reducing logistics costs, supporting road preservation, and lowering carbon emissions. The MV Mpungu"},{"p":27,"t":"will serve key regional ports including Port Bell, Jinja, and Mwanza, transporting construction materials and heavy machinery, and strengthening regional connectivity."},{"p":27,"t":"86. To enhance maritime safety, security, and human capital development, the Government has implemented targeted regulatory, training, and infrastructure interventions. Between 2022 and 2025, all eligible ships docking at the Port of Mombasa were inspected, alongside 3,242 small boats  and  vessels,  to  ensure  compliance  with  maritime  safety  standards.  To  expand  Kenya's skilled maritime workforce, 13,455 youths were trained in accredited maritime courses, while 4,821  Kenyan  seafarers  were  recruited  to  serve  on  international  vessels,  reflecting  growing global  demand  for  Kenyan  maritime  professionals.  In  addition,  the  Government  signed  four Memoranda of Understanding with Seychelles, Angola, Egypt, and South Korea to strengthen maritime  cooperation,  capacity  building,  and  seafarer  placement.  Infrastructure  development also  progressed,  with  construction  of  the  Kisumu  Maritime  Rescue  and  Coordination  Centre reaching 20 percent completion, and the Survival Training and Certification Centre in Mombasa attaining 17 percent completion, both critical to improving maritime emergency response and professional training standards."},{"p":27,"t":"87. To enable local fishing communities to transition from artisanal fisheries to modern, deepsea  commercial  operations  within  Kenya's  200 -mile  Exclusive  Economic  Zone  (EEZ)  and beyond, the Government is implementing a range of support measures. These include facilitating access  to  financial  resources  through  concessional  loans,  grants,  and  partnerships  with commercial  and  development  finance  institutions  to  enable  investment  in  deep-sea  fishing trawlers and equipment. Complementary capacity-building programmes will provide training in vessel  operation,  navigation,  sustainable  fishing  practices,  fish  handling,  safety  at  sea,  and business  management. Through  these interventions, the Government  aims  to increase participation of coastal communities in high-value, export-oriented fisheries, enhance productivity and incomes, create employment opportunities, and strengthen the competitiveness of Kenya's blue economy while ensuring compliance with national and international maritime and fisheries regulations."},{"p":27,"t":"88. To  advance  sustainable  fisheries  and  aquaculture,  the  Government  will  establish  the Kabonyo Regional Training Centre of Excellence to strengthen research, capacity development, and  technology  transfer  in  modern  aquaculture  practices.  In  support  of  sustainable  resource management and investment, the Government will intensify fish stock enhancement programmes and undertake comprehensive fish quality and ecosystem assessments to safeguard long-term viability of aquatic resources. To strengthen fish value chain development, the Government will construct 77 fish landing sites, comprising 20 along the Indian Ocean coastline and 57 across inland waters, to improve fish handling, enhance market access, promote value addition, and support socio-economic transformation within fishing communities."},{"section":"1.3.4 The Services Economy"},{"p":27,"t":"1.3.4 The Services Economy"},{"section":"1.3.4.1 Financial Services"},{"p":27,"t":"1.3.4.1 Financial Services"},{"p":27,"t":"89. The  financial  services  sector  continues  to  play  a  pivotal  role  in  Kenya's  economic transformation by facilitating access to credit, savings, investment, and financial inclusion. Over the past decade, significant progress has been made in expanding digital financial services, with mobile money platforms now serving over 30 million users, enabling faster, more convenient payments,  micro-savings,  and  credit  access.  The  Government,  through  the  Central  Bank  of Kenya (CBK) and Financial Sector Deepening (FSD) Kenya, has promoted financial literacy, consumer protection, and inclusion programs targeting youth, women, rural populations, and micro and small enterprises (MSEs). Regulatory reforms, including the Microfinance Act, Sacco Societies Act, and enhancements to licensing and supervision frameworks, have strengthened sector  stability,  transparency,  and  confidence.  Initiatives  supporting  SME  financing,  green"},{"p":28,"t":"finance,  and  insurance  penetration  have  further  broadened  access  to  financial  services  and promoted resilience within the economy."},{"p":28,"t":"90. In  the  banking  sector,  CBK  introduced  the  revised  Risk-Based  Credit  Pricing  Model (RBCPM) in September 2025 for all new variable rate loans, with full adoption for existing loans scheduled by February 28, 2026. The RBCPM aligns lending rates with borrowers ' risk profiles using the Kenya Shilling Overnight Interbank Average ( KESONIA) rate plus a risk premium, and banks are required to disclose weighted average lending rates, premiums, and fees on their websites and on the Total Cost of Credit platform. In addition, the operating hours of Kenya Electronic Payment and Settlement System (KEPSS) and Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) systems were extended from July 2025 to enhance the efficiency, accessibility, and resilience of Kenya's payments ecosystem, supporting the country's transition to a 24/7 digital economy and regional financial integration."},{"p":28,"t":"91. The Government has strengthened the regulation of virtual assets through the Virtual Assets Service Providers (VASPs) Act, 2025, which came into force on November 4, 2025. The Act establishes a framework for licensing, supervision, and regulation of VASPs by CBK and the Capital  Markets  Authority  (CMA),  including  requirements  to  prevent  money  laundering, terrorism  financing,  and  proliferation  financing.  Licensing  and  supervision  of  VASPs  will commence upon the issuance of implementing Regulations."},{"p":28,"t":"92. Progress has also been made in the capital markets and investment space. The Government is reviewing the legal and regulatory framework to address emerging developments, including collective investment schemes, public offerings, alternative investment instruments, and credit rating  operations,  enhancing  transparency,  investor  protection,  and  market  efficiency.  In  the insurance and pensions sub-sector, the Government has advanced reforms aimed at expanding coverage, strengthening prudential regulation, and improving operational efficiency. Digitization  and  re-engineering  of  public  sector  pensions,  including  the  Public  Service Superannuation  Scheme  (PSSS)  and  non-contributory  schemes,  are  underway  to  improve monitoring, ensure timely payments, and enhance sustainability. Regulatory oversight of private pensions and insurance companies has been strengthened through enhanced reporting requirements, risk-based supervision, and consumer protection initiatives."},{"p":28,"t":"93. Planned  reforms  over  the  medium  term  across  the  financial  services  sector  focus  on consolidating these achievements. To enhance and entrench the role of microfinance banks in supporting  MSMEs  finance  needs,  the  Government  will  prioritize  the  enactment  of  the Microfinance Bill 2025 that is currently in Parliament. Digital financial services will be further expanded to underserved populations, including rural communities and women, SME financing, green finance, and insurance penetration will be deepened through innovative credit guarantees, blended finance, and sector-specific support programs, while efforts will be scaled up to create programmes  that  formally  link  smallscale  traders  and  Jua  Kali's  artisans  with  large  scale manufacturers  and  international  value  chains.  In  banking,  full  adoption  of  RBCPM  will  be reinforced alongside improved consumer transparency and financial literacy."},{"p":28,"t":"94. In addition, payments infrastructure will continue to be upgraded, including interoperability across mobile money and banking platforms and cross-border settlements. VASPs regulation will advance with the issuance of implementing Regulations, licensing, and ongoing supervision to ensure market integrity. Capital markets reforms will be finalized to strengthen frameworks for  collective  investment  schemes,  alternative  instruments,  and  credit  rating  operations.  The Government will also continue strengthening prudential oversight and consumer protection in insurance and pensions, while digitizing and streamlining operations to improve efficiency and sustainability."},{"section":"1.3.4.2 Tourism Sector"},{"p":29,"t":"1.3.4.2 Tourism Sector"},{"p":29,"t":"95. The tourism sector remains a key pillar of the economy and continues to play a critical role in advancing the socio-economic well-being of Kenyans. Its multiplier effects extend across key sectors  including  agriculture,  trade,  environment,  manufacturing,  and  infrastructure,  thereby supporting broad-based economic development. The sector is a leading foreign exchange earner and a significant source of employment, contributing directly to national growth, community livelihoods, and sustainable economic transformation."},{"p":29,"t":"96. To enhance the tourism in the country, the Government has developed the National Tourism Policy (20252030) to transform Kenya's tourism sector into an internationally competitive and sustainable industry. The Policy aims to promote sustainable tourism that supports economic development,  environmental  conservation,  and  community  participation  while  strengthening legal and institutional frameworks for effective sector coordination. It seeks to enhance quality standards,  integrate  tourism  priorities  into  national  and  county  development  plans,  mobilize resources  for  sustainable  growth,  incentivize  investment,  and  promote  innovative,  marketresponsive tourism products. Recognizing that Kenya's traditional reliance on safari and beach tourism limits resilience, the Policy prioritizes re-engineering tourism product development to tap into new markets and improve visitor experiences. Key focus areas include strengthening Kenya's destination identity by evolving 'Magical Kenya' into a multi -layered national brand, deepening  niche  tourism  offerings  such  as  culinary  tourism,  wellness  retreats,  cultural  and heritage experiences, and film tourism, and accelerating smart tourism initiatives."},{"p":29,"t":"97. In addition, the Policy underscores robust marketing and promotion initiatives to position Kenya as a premier global tourism destination through aggressive destination marketing in both traditional and emerging source markets and by implementing integrated marketing campaigns across online and offline platforms to enhance visibility and attract more international arrivals."},{"p":29,"t":"98. Over the medium term, the sector has demonstrated remarkable growth and resilience. In 2024, the country recorded a historic 2.4 million international arrivals, representing a 15 percent increase from the previous year, generating tourism earnings of KSh 452.2 billion, an increase of 19.8 percent from 2023, bolstered by aggressive marketing and the implementation of the Electronic Travel Authorization (ETA). Similarly, revenue generated from the tourism levy rose from KSh 3.9 billion to KSh 5.1 billion. The number of local and international delegates rose from 638,478 to 736,874, and local conferences hosted increasing from 10,558 to 12,224. In addition, 991 establishments, including hotels and lodges, were assessed and accredited to meet quality standards."},{"p":29,"t":"99. The Government is committed to ensuring the safety and security of all tourists visiting the country. To achieve this, the Government will strengthen the Tourism Police Unit to enhance law enforcement and protection in key tourism areas. Licensed tour operators will be listed on the National Tourism Service Portal to provide tourists with verified and trustworthy service providers.  Additionally,  a  Tourism  Crisis  Management  Unit  will  be  established  to  provide immediate  assistance  to  tourists  in  distress,  allowing  for  timely  reporting  and  resolution  of safety-related  incidents.  These  measures  aim  to  build  confidence  among  both  domestic  and international tourists, promote a safe and secure tourism environment, and reinforce Kenya's reputation as a premier tourist destination."},{"section":"1.3.5 Environment and Climate Change"},{"p":29,"t":"1.3.5 Environment and Climate Change"},{"p":29,"t":"100. Provision of a  clean,  secure,  and  sustainable  environment,  together  with  robust  climate change mitigation and adaptation measures, remains central to the realization of the Bottom-Up Economic Transformation Agenda (BETA) and Vision 2030. In this regard, the Government continues to mainstream environmental conservation, climate resilience, reversal of deforestation, biodiversity protection, and land restoration across all programmes at both national"},{"p":30,"t":"and county levels. To strengthen the policy  and  legislative framework, the Government will undertake  a  comprehensive  review  of  the  National  Environment  Policy  (2013)  and  the Environmental Management and Coordination Act (EMCA), 1999, and develop ten regulations under  the  Climate  Change  Act,  alongside  the  enactment  of  the  Kenya  Meteorology  Bill,  to enhance climate governance and service delivery."},{"p":30,"t":"101. The Government will also prioritize the restoration of 40 degraded wetlands to enhance ecosystem resilience and safeguard critical biodiversity. Enforcement of the ban on single-use plastics  will  be  strengthened,  supported  by  the  promotion  of  circular  economy  initiatives  to reduce environmental pollution. In alignment with Kenya's Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), the Government will continue implementing mitigation and adaptation interventions aimed  at  reducing  greenhouse  gas  emissions  to  98  MTCO₂  equivalent  by  2030.  To  support climate-informed decision-making across sectors, modernization of meteorological infrastructure  and  services  will  be  accelerated  to  improve  the  reliability,  accuracy,  and accessibility of  weather  and  climate  forecasts  nationwide.  In  addition, 12  solid  waste management demonstration centres will be established to support counties in adopting modern and  sustainable  waste  management  practices.  Conservation  of  water  towers  will  continue, including restoration of the Cherangany Forest Ecosystem through the growing of 4 million tree seedlings. Watershed management efforts will also be enhanced through reclamation of 1,200 hectares of degraded land in the Lake Naivasha Basin and 700 hectares in the Lake Victoria Basin."},{"p":30,"t":"102. To  restore  and  enhance  the  country's  forest  cover,  the  Government  will  intensify implementation of the 15-Billion Tree Programme (2022 -2032), targeting the growth of 4.5 billion trees by 2027 as a key medium-term milestone. To support large-scale restoration, the Government will produce and distribute 700,000 kilograms of certified tree seeds and establish 400 tree nurseries nationwide as propagation centres, enabling production of 2.2 billion seedlings for  rehabilitation  of  degraded  landscapes.  Restoration  efforts  will  include  rehabilitation  of 330,050 hectares  of  degraded  forest  areas  and  protection  of  2.6  million  hectares  of  gazetted public forests. To enhance access, surveillance, and fire management, 690 kilometres of forest roads  will  be  maintained.  Forest  expansion  initiatives  will  include  establishment  of  6,800 hectares of bamboo forests, 8,504 hectares of forest plantations, 10,163 hectares of woodlots, and  gazettement  of  4,500  hectares  of  new  public  forests.  In  addition,  139  forest  research technologies will be developed and disseminated to promote innovation and sustainable forest management."},{"p":30,"t":"103. Significant  achievements  have  been  realized  in  the  implementation  of  environmental conservation, climate resilience, and circular-economy initiatives reforms. Key achievements realized between 2022 and 2025 include the establishment of four mini e-waste model collection centres,  six  waste  management  demonstration  centres,  and  six  Model  Material  Recovery Facilities  (MRFs),  alongside  licensing  of  249,758  waste  transporters  to  ensure  safe  and compliant waste handling. Further, six green points and centres of excellence were established, 360 hectares of degraded ecosystems rehabilitated, and 427,803 hectares of water catchment areas  protected.  Climate  monitoring  capacity  was  strengthened  through  installation  of  120 Automatic  Weather  Stations  across  24  counties  and  three  Automatic  Weather  Observing Systems. National restoration efforts also included restoration of 59 wetlands, development of Kenya's  NDC  (20312035)  to  unlock  climate  finance,  and  implementation  of  wide-ranging climate mitigation and adaptation actions."},{"p":30,"t":"104. Further, under the 15-Billion Tree Programme, the Government coordinated the planting of  1.076  billion  trees,  supported  by  production  of  192,981  kilograms  of  certified  seeds  and distribution of 150,367 kilograms to counties and forestry stakeholders. A total of 260.1 million tree  seedlings  were  produced  to  support  landscape  restoration,  resulting  in  rehabilitation  of 58,976.4 hectares of degraded natural forests and establishment of 27,633.2 hectares of woodlots"},{"p":31,"t":"on private farms. Protection measures covered 2.602 million hectares of gazetted natural forests. Forest development initiatives included establishment of 16,004 hectares of forest plantations in public gazetted forests, 18,259 hectares of commercial forests, and 2,141 hectares of bamboo forests.  To  support  implementation,  the  Government  constructed  12  seed  processing  units, maintained  610.7  kilometres  of  forest  roads,  and  conserved  389.4  hectares  of  seed  sources critical for sustained quality seed."},{"p":31,"t":"105. In  recognition  of  the  critical  role  mangroves  play  in  coastal  protection,  biodiversity conservation, carbon sequestration, and supporting fisheries-based livelihoods, the Government is implementing targeted initiatives to preserve and rehabilitate Kenya's mangrove ecosystems. These measures include the adoption of the National Mangrove Ecosystem Guidelines (2025) to standardize  conservation  practices,  coupled  with  the  implementation  of  Community-Based Ecological  Mangrove  Restoration  (CBEMR)  approaches  to  empower  local  communities  in sustainable  mangrove  management.  Restoration  efforts  focus  on  replanting  degraded  areas, controlling illegal logging, enhancing monitoring and enforcement, and promoting alternative livelihoods  for  coastal  populations  dependent  on  mangroves.  These  interventions  aim  to strengthen ecosystem resilience, protect coastal communities from climate-related risks, support sustainable  fisheries,  and  contribute  to  Kenya's  climate  change  mitigation  and  biodiversity conservation goals."},{"section":"1.3.6 Education and Training"},{"p":31,"t":"1.3.6 Education and Training"},{"p":31,"t":"106. Kenya's  social  and  economic  transformation  depends  critically  on  the  development  of strong human capital to support long-term growth. To sustain ongoing education reforms, the Government  will  continue  strengthening  the  foundations  of  quality  learning,  training,  and research; promoting equity and inclusivity; scaling up investment in the education sector; and enhancing  system  resilience  to  emerging  challenges,  including  technological  disruption, widening inequalities, and global shifts in education delivery. In addition, the Government will strengthen education-to-industry linkages to ensure training systems respond to evolving labour market and enterprise development needs."},{"p":31,"t":"107. To  strengthen  governance  and  relevance  in  primary  and  secondary  education,  the Government will complete reviews of the legal and policy framework. Key reforms include enactment of a law governing Teacher Education and Training, establishment of the Code of Regulation for Teachers (CORT), and amendments to the Basic Education Act to align the sector with  contemporary  needs.  The  Government  will  continue  rolling  out  Competency-Based Education and Training (CBET) for learners transitioning from Grade 9, as part of the nationwide shift  from  the  8-4-4  system  to  the  2-6-3-3-3  system.  CBET  strengthens  alignment  between education and industry by emphasizing digital skills, critical thinking, and practical problemsolving.  To  support  implementation,  construction  of  specialized  Junior  Secondary  School facilities will continue, 50,000 teachers will be trained in competency-based pedagogies, and mid-year assessments will be introduced to support learners requiring re-assessment."},{"p":31,"t":"108. To achieve optimal teacher-learner ratios and improve learning outcomes, the Government will  recruit  30,000  additional  teachers,  prioritizing  STEM  and  technical  subjects.  Classroom infrastructure will be expanded through construction of 20,000 new classrooms and rehabilitation  of  15,000  existing  classrooms.  Emphasis  will  be  placed  on  construction  and equipping of laboratories, particularly  in  rural  schools,  sanitation  facilities,  libraries,  and  the provision of digital learning resources. The School Meals Programme will be expanded to reach three  million  learners  in  arid  and  semi-arid  counties,  improving  enrolment,  retention,  and learning outcomes. Means-testing for higher education placement will be streamlined to enhance fairness, and inclusive education will be strengthened through assistive technologies, including refreshable braille displays."},{"p":32,"t":"109. In  support  of  industrialization,  tertiary  and  higher  education  remain  a  priority  to  equip young people with market-relevant skills, entrepreneurial capabilities, and adaptive competencies. For this reason, the Digital Learning Programme and ICT infrastructure will be expanded to build digital literacy and global readiness. The Digital Learning Programme will expand technology-enabled learning, benefiting both TVET and university students. Teacher welfare  and  continuous  professional  development  remain  strategic  priorities.  Technical  and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) will be strengthened through establishment of 100 centres equipped with modern facilities and industry-aligned curricula, with capacity to train 200,000  youth  annually.  Funding,  curricula,  and  industry  partnerships  will  be  enhanced  to position  TVET  as  a  pathway  to  employability,  productivity,  and  innovation.  To  deepen education-industry  linkages,  TVET  institutions  will  be  linked  to  Constituency  Industrial Development Centres (CIDCs) and County Aggregation and Industrial Parks (CAIPs) to support practical training, skills and technology transfer, industry mentorship, and enterprise incubation. In  addition,  the  Government  will  progressively  adopt  dual-training  models  that  combine classroom  learning  with  structured  industry  and  enterprise  exposure,  including  embedded entrepreneurship  training  to  equip  technical  graduates  with  self-employment  and  enterprise development capabilities."},{"p":32,"t":"110. Significant  progress  has  been  recorded  across  all  levels  of  education.  In  primary  and secondary education, more than 14 million learners benefited from capitation grants covering over 10 million primary and four million secondary students. Competency-Based Curriculum implementation reached Grade 9, with over 300,000 teachers trained and large-scale distribution of  learning  materials.  Over  150,000  teachers  were  recruited  on  permanent  terms,  with  an additional 46,000 intern teachers deployed. Teacher management reforms included promotion of 126,462 teachers, digitization of 403,476 teacher records, and retooling of 220,097 teachers on CBET.  Specialized  Junior  Secondary  School  facilities were  constructed,  and  mid-year assessments were introduced to support learners needing re-assessment. Across infrastructure and  digital  learning  initiatives,  13,500  classrooms,  863  laboratories,  and  1,896  sanitation facilities  were  constructed,  over  500  libraries  established,  and  over  one  million  devices distributed.  Additionally,  the  School  Meals  Programme  reached  over  2.3  million  learners annually, contributing to improved participation, retention, and learning outcomes."},{"p":32,"t":"111. In  tertiary  and  higher  education,  gross  enrolment  in  TVET  increased  from  562,499  to 708,885 learners, the number of accredited TVET institutions grew from 2,401 to 2,969, and universities supported over 550,000 students. A total of 3,300 trainers were recruited, and CBET candidates assessed and certified rose from 16,083 to 214,275. In total, 110,251 trainees received scholarships, 36 TVET projects were completed, and 108 projects progressed at various stages of implementation. In addition, the Open University of Kenya was operationalized, offering 30 bachelor's degree programmes and enrolling 5,063 students. Under the student -centred financing model,  257,523  students  received  scholarships,  while  38,250  benefited  from  bursaries.  To promote research and innovation, 52 innovations were incubated into commercial ventures, 430 innovators were trained, and 78 outstanding innovators recognized."},{"section":"1.3.7 Women Agenda"},{"p":32,"t":"1.3.7 Women Agenda"},{"p":32,"t":"112. The Constitution of Kenya guarantees equal treatment for men and women and upholds their right to equal opportunities across political, economic, cultural, and social spheres. In line with  this  mandate,  the  Government  continues  to  advance  gender  equality  by  promoting meaningful inclusion of women in decision-making, enhancing their economic empowerment, and  intensifying  efforts  to  eliminate  Gender-Based  Violence  (GBV)  and  Female  Genital Mutilation (FGM)."},{"p":32,"t":"113. To  strengthen  gender  equality,  community  development,  and  social  empowerment,  the Government has implemented targeted interventions to expand access to economic opportunities"},{"p":33,"t":"and strengthen social protection systems. Key initiatives include planned disbursement of KSh 12  billion  to  16,850  Affirmative  Action  Groups,  provision  of  bursaries  and  scholarships  to 178,500 needy students, and support for girls' education through sanitary towels for 11.1 million girls  and  7,500  dignity  kits  for  GBV  survivors.  Additionally,  KSh  9.6  billion  will  support 660,000 women entrepreneurs, while 1,200 duty bearers and 9,000 community members will be trained  on  GBV  prevention.  A  further  99,000  individuals  will  be  sensitized  on  gender mainstreaming, and 3,000 survivors will be engaged as frontline advocates in the fight against FGM."},{"p":33,"t":"114. To strengthen policy implementation, the Government will advance several priority actions, including  continued  financing  of  Affirmative  Action  Groups,  expanded  financial  support  to women entrepreneurs totalling KSh 3.3 billion, and implementation of recommendations from the Taskforce on GBV and Femicide. The Government will also establish three safe houses and GBV protection centers, intensify the national campaign to eradicate FGM, and undertake a Special Needs Assessment Survey to inform future interventions."},{"p":33,"t":"115. Between FY 2022/23 and FY 2024/25, substantial progress was made in advancing gender equality and social empowerment. During this period, KSh 3.33 billion was disbursed to 10,785 Affirmative  Action  Groups,  and  155,580  needy  students  benefited  from  bursaries  and scholarships through the National Government Affirmative Action Fund (NGAAF). The Women Enterprise  Fund  (WEF)  disbursed  KSh  3.12  billion  to  261,681  women  entrepreneurs,  and 361,481 women were trained in financial literacy. In addition, 64,000 individuals were trained on gender mainstreaming, 43,700 resource persons and duty bearers received training on antiFGM strategies, and 11,485 persons were trained in psychosocial support and counselling to strengthen the national response to GBV."},{"section":"1.3.8 Social Protection"},{"p":33,"t":"1.3.8 Social Protection"},{"p":33,"t":"116. Social  Safety  Net  Programmes  remain  a  central  pillar  of  the  Government's  Bottom -Up Economic Transformation Agenda, aimed at reducing poverty,  creating jobs,  and expanding income  opportunities  for  economically  excluded  populations.  To  achieve  these  goals,  the Government  continues  to  strengthen  and  expand  social  safety  nets  and  allocate  financial resources to safeguard vulnerable groups nationwide. Income security for vulnerable households will  be  enhanced  through  cash  transfers  to  1,211,863  beneficiaries  under  the  Inua  Jamii Programme, including 1,148,256 older persons and 63,607 households with persons with severe disabilities (PWSDs). Additional support includes training, registration, and linkage of 206,000 community  groups  to  Microfinance  Institutions,  and  sensitization  of  33,000  community members on healthy ageing and older persons' rights. Well -being interventions for persons with disabilities include registration and issuance of disability cards to 510,000 PWDs, provision of sunscreen  lotion  to  5,000  persons  with  albinism,  and  essential  drugs  and  supplies  to  20,000 persons with autism. Furthermore, adult literacy will be expanded through the establishment of 47 Accelerated Adult Education Centres (AECs)."},{"p":33,"t":"117. The Government will strengthen child protection services through targeted interventions. These  include  disbursement  of  cash  transfers  to  441,516  households  with  Orphans  and Vulnerable  Children  (OVC)  and  22,300  learners  under  the  Presidential  Secondary  School Bursary Programme annually. Child protection systems will be enhanced through the screening and rescue of 4,500 human trafficking victims, rescue and reintegration of 20,500 street persons, and provision of care and protection services to 1,295,000 children affected by violence and 12,610 children in conflict with the law. Family-based care will be promoted by placing 50,000 children  under  Alternative  Family  Care  Options.  Additionally,  the  Nutritional  Improvement Cash and through Education (NICHE) Programme will be implemented in 25 counties, and a cash-plus pilot programme for poor and vulnerable adolescents will be rolled out, encompassing"},{"p":34,"t":"cash  transfers,  skills  training,  social  and  behavioural  change  activities,  case  management, psychosocial support, childcare, and life skills training."},{"p":34,"t":"118. Between  FY  2022/23  and  FY  2024/25,  the  Government  disbursed  cash  transfers  to 1,749,656 beneficiaries under the Inua Jamii Programme, comprising 1,253,045 older persons, 63,607 households with PWSDs, and 443,004 households caring for OVCs. During the same period, 175,467 Community Self-Help Groups were registered, 152,403 PWDs were registered, and 12,705 assistive devices were provided. Additional interventions included therapy services to 15,884 persons, drug provision to 6,941 persons with autism, and distribution of sunscreen lotion to 3,800 persons with albinism. Child protection efforts managed 946,798 cases, placed 1,508 children under Alternative Family Care Options, resolved 533,436 child rights violations, rescued 15,163 street persons, and provided bursaries and scholarships to 35,000 OVCs. Further, 155,580 needy students benefited from bursaries and scholarships, supporting equitable access to education for disadvantaged learners."},{"section":"1.3.9 Sports, Culture and Arts"},{"p":34,"t":"1.3.9 Sports, Culture and Arts"},{"section":"1.3.9.1 Sports and Arts"},{"p":34,"t":"1.3.9.1 Sports and Arts"},{"p":34,"t":"119. Sports and arts play a critical role in promoting national identity, cultural expression, social cohesion, and economic growth. The Government will continue to promote and develop sports at  all  levels,  focusing on the implementation of the Sports Policy, enforcement of the World Anti-Doping  Code  and  the  Convention  Against  Doping,  and  regulation  of  sports  activities nationwide.  In  addition,  the  Government  will  strengthen  coordination  of  sports  training  and education, expand the sports industry to support sustainable livelihoods, develop and manage sports facilities, and establish sports academies to nurture talent. Capacity-building efforts for athletes and technical personnel will be intensified, particularly in anti-doping compliance and awareness."},{"p":34,"t":"120. Over the last three years, significant progress has been achieved in the sports sector. Kenya successfully  hosted  the  2024  CHAN  tournament  and  continues  preparations  for  the  2027 AFCON, supported by major infrastructure upgrades including completed renovations of Moi International Sports Centre (MISC) Kasarani and Nyayo National Stadium to CHAN standards, and construction of the Talanta Stadium (Raila Odinga International Stadium). Kenyan athletes excelled internationally, securing 131 medals in major competitions, including 11 medals at the 2025  World  Athletics  Championships  in  Tokyo.  During  this  period,  the  country  hosted  35 international  sports  competitions,  enhancing  its  regional  and  global  sporting  profile.  The Government also facilitated participation of 115 teams in regional and international competitions and registered 760 sports organizations. Capacity-building reached 68,870 individuals through anti-doping  education,  while  6,960  athletes  and  3,683  technical  personnel  received  targeted training, including sessions on anti-doping compliance and best practices."},{"p":34,"t":"121. Over the medium term, the Government will continue strengthening sports development by hosting 26 international events, including the 2027 AFCON, and supporting 143 Kenyan teams in  global  competitions.  Talent  development  will  be  advanced  through  60  constituency-based sports academies and training of 10,200 athletes and 4,800 technical personnel. Infrastructure development will be intensified, with completion of the Kenya Academy of Sports Complex, upgrades to 14 stadia, and enhancement of 23 community sports facilities. Preparations for the 2027 AFCON include the Talanta Sports City, currently at 68 percent completion, scheduled for delivery by early to mid-2026. The facility will feature a 60,000-seat multi-purpose stadium primarily for football, adjacent training grounds for athletics and rugby, and employs over 3,300 workers operating in double shifts. Recent works include roof installation, interior finishing, development of three full training pitches, and pedestrian walkways. Other key stadia slated for"},{"p":35,"t":"upgrades include MISC Kasarani, Nyayo National Stadium, and Kipchoge Keino Stadium, to meet AFCON standards."},{"p":35,"t":"122. Governance of the sports sector will be enhanced by registering 1,350 sports organizations and broadening anti-doping compliance efforts, including sensitization of 76,000 individuals and 13,050  intelligence-based  athlete  tests.  Sector  governance  will  also  be  strengthened  through digitization,  streamlined  licensing  and  registration  processes,  improved  regulatory  oversight, policy reviews, and promotion of sustainable financing mechanisms for sports, arts, and culture."},{"section":"1.3.9.2 Culture and Heritage"},{"p":35,"t":"1.3.9.2 Culture and Heritage"},{"p":35,"t":"123. The  Government's  Bottom -Up  Economic  Transformation  Agenda  (BETA)  aims  to conserve  Kenya's  diverse  cultures  and  heritage  while  promoting  the  commercialization  of indigenous knowledge. In line with this, the Government has implemented initiatives to advocate for  the  preservation,  conservation,  and  promotion  of  cultural  expressions  that  contribute positively to national identity."},{"p":35,"t":"124. Significant achievements over the past years include the restoration of nine heritage sites and monuments, strengthening cultural diplomacy through international exchange programmes, and  organization  of  heritage  preservation  exhibitions.  Additionally,  the  Government  has honoured  142  heroes  representing  diverse  contributions  to  Kenya's  freedom,  unity,  and development; hosted 21 cultural festivals; and empowered 3,397 artists and cultural practitioners. Documentation and archiving efforts have included establishing a National Digital Repository and 13 county-level digital repositories, acquisition of 13,772 archival materials, digitization of 1.3 million public records, and microfilming of 203,977 analogue records."},{"p":35,"t":"125. Over the medium term, the Government will continue advancing the cultural agenda by modernizing museums, protecting nine cultural heritage sites, and hosting nine inter-community cultural exchange festivals. Talent development will be enhanced through establishment of three music  studios  and  nurturing  of  over  1,800  musicians.  Empowerment  initiatives  will  target women in pastoralist communities, with 1,200 women and girls trained in bead-craft production. To promote economic opportunities, 450 cultural and creative products will be commercialized to create jobs for cultural practitioners, youth, and women. The Government will also recognize and honour 450 heroes and heroines to foster national pride and unity. In safeguarding Kenya's documentary  heritage,  370,000  records  will  be  digitized,  stored,  and  archived,  ensuring  the nation's rich cultural and historical legacy is preserved for future generations."},{"section":"1.3.10 Youth Empowerment and Development Agenda"},{"p":35,"t":"1.3.10 Youth Empowerment and Development Agenda"},{"p":35,"t":"126. Y outh empowerment and development remain a cornerstone of the Government's Bottom -Up  Economic  Transformation  Agenda  (BETA). Anchored  on  the  Kenya  Young  People's Agenda,  Government  interventions  aim  to  equip  youth  with  entrepreneurial  and  life  skills, promote youth employment locally and abroad, and unlock the potential of youth-owned Micro, Small,  and  Medium  Enterprises  (MSMEs).  Over  the  past  three  financial  years,  Kenya implemented four Bilateral Labour Agreements (BLAs) and two Memorandums of Understanding (MOUs) to enhance decent jobs under the labour migration programme, orienting 231,877 migrant workers through pre-departure training and recognizing 527 craftsmen on prior learning."},{"p":35,"t":"127. Over the medium term, the Government aims to place 570,000 job seekers locally and abroad, sign 12 bilateral labour agreements, certify 310,000 workers, and conduct workplace inspections. Additionally, 90,000 youth will be trained in life skills and technical competencies to  boost  employability  and  wealth  creation,  while  43,000  youth  will  receive  mentorship  and entrepreneurship training. A total of 4,422 youth talents will be identified, nurtured, and awarded through  the  WHO'Z  Next  Talent  Search  Programme, ensuring  recognition  and  support  for"},{"p":36,"t":"creative and innovative potential. Further,  comprehensive ICT  services, guidance and counselling, talent, and career development will be provided to 580,000 youth through One-Stop Youth Empowerment Centres, creating accessible platforms for skills acquisition and personal development. The development of the Kenya Youth Development Index will enable monitoring and tracking of youth outcomes to inform data-driven policies. In the creative economy, the Government plans to issue 16,300 licences to film distributors and exhibitors, supporting local and foreign production and promoting Kenya as a regional hub for creative industries."},{"p":36,"t":"128. To further enhance youth engagement, the Government is leveraging the National Youth Opportunities Towards Advancement (NYOTA) Project, a five-year initiative geared towards productively  involving  young  people  in  national  development.  The  project  targets  820,000 unemployed youth aged 18 -29 years (and up to 35 years for Persons with Disabilities) with Form 4 Education and below. NYOTA has four key interventions: i) Improving youth employability by  providing  skills  training,  apprenticeships,  and  certification  for  90,000  youth,  including recognition of prior learning for 20,000 beneficiaries; ii) Expanding employment opportunities through supporting 110,000 youth entrepreneurs with business skills, capital, mentorship, and financial  linkages;  iii)  Supporting  youth  savings  by  equipping  190,000  beneficiaries  with financial literacy and saving incentives; and iv) Strengthening youth employment systems by building  institutional  capacity  and  providing  digital  training  for  600,000  youth  to  access Government opportunities. Through NYOTA,  youth will be empowered with skills, entrepreneurship  opportunities,  financial  literacy,  and  civic  engagement,  positioning  them  as active agents of national development, innovation, and economic resilience."},{"p":36,"t":"129. Significant progress over the last three years reflects the impact of these initiatives. The Government has provided youth-friendly services to 1,177,480 young people, including 72,623 beneficiaries of subsidized Sexual and Reproductive Health (SRH) services, and trained 94,298 youth in leadership and governance. Additionally, 56,350 youth were equipped with life skills, while 3,943 talents were identified and nurtured in arts, innovation, and creative industries. To promote economic empowerment, 28,003 youth entrepreneurs accessed loans totaling KSh 553 million, and 3,537 youth secured employment opportunities abroad."},{"p":36,"t":"130. In entrepreneurship and the creative sector, 218,902 youth were trained in business skills, and 24,507 youth received entrepreneurship-specific training. Guidance and counselling services on career development and SRH reached 1,177,480 youth at empowerment centres nationwide. The creative economy benefited from support to 1,745 local and foreign film producers, training for  1,847  filmmakers,  issuance  of  1,795  film  licences,  and  nurturing  of  60  students  in  film production. These interventions collectively de monstrate the Government's continued commitment to harnessing youth potential, expanding economic and creative opportunities, and ensuring  that  young  people  are  equipped  to  contribute  meaningfully  to  Kenya's  social  and economic transformation."},{"section":"1.3.11 Governance and Rule of Law"},{"p":36,"t":"1.3.11 Governance and Rule of Law"},{"p":36,"t":"131. Strong  governance  institutions  and  adherence  to  the  rule  of  law  provide  the  enabling environment for sustainable development. The Constitution establishes separation of powers, independence of institutions, and accountability mechanisms ensuring good governance. Article 10 enshrines national values including rule of law, democracy, transparency, and accountability. Consequently,  the  Government  has  prioritized  strengthening  governance  within  the  public service through reforms, laws, and policies designed to enhance professionalism, transparency, and service delivery."},{"p":36,"t":"132. Kenya has made notable strides in governance and the rule of law, which are central to economic growth, stability, and citizen confidence including:"},{"p":37,"t":"The Judiciary has implemented reforms to improve access to justice, reduce case backlog, and increase efficiency through e-court systems, online case management, establishment of 19  Employment  Courts  across  all  counties,  and  use  of  alternative  dispute  resolution mechanisms.  As  a  result,  the  justice  sector  reduced  case  backlog  by  30  percent,  from 500,000  cases  in  2022  to  350,000  in  2025,  and  digitalized  over  100  courts,  enabling electronic filing and virtual hearings. Legal aid services have been expanded through the National  Legal  Aid  and  Awareness  Programme,  improving  access  for  marginalized populations;"},{"p":37,"t":"ii) Efforts  to  combat  corruption  have  intensified,  led  by  the  Ethics  and  Anti-Corruption Commission  (EACC).  Key  milestones  include  the  enforcement  of  asset  declaration requirements for public officers, investigation and prosecution of high-profile corruption cases, and strengthening of preventive measures such as digitization of procurement and public financial management to reduce opportunities for rent-seeking. These reforms have enhanced transparency, accountability, and public trust in governance;"},{"p":37,"t":"iii) Transformation of the public service has been advanced through performance management systems linking staff evaluation to service delivery outcomes, adoption of e-government platforms  such  as  e-citizen  portals  and  e-procurement,  digitized  records,  and  targeted capacity building programs. These reforms have improved  operational efficiency, responsiveness, and compliance across government institutions;"},{"p":37,"t":"iv) Devolution  has  been  fully  operationalized  through  functioning  County  Governments, including assemblies, executive structures, and service delivery units. Implementation of Integrated Financial Management Systems (IFMIS) at the county level has strengthened transparency and accountability in public fund management. Citizen engagement platforms now  allow  participation  in  budget  formulation  and  county  development  planning, enhancing oversight and inclusivity; and"},{"p":37,"t":"In  the  security  sector,  the  Government  has  strengthened  the  National  Police  Service, including  specialized  units  for  counter-terrorism  and  cybercrime.  Police  recruitment reduced  the  police-to-citizen  ratio  from  1:1,150  to  1:800,  complemented  by  training  in modern investigation,  human  rights,  community  policing,  and  cybercrime.  Correctional Services has expanded rehabilitation programmes and probation services to all counties. Community policing initiatives  enhance  citizen  participation,  while  border  security  has been upgraded with modern scanners and biometric systems to manage cross-border threats and illegal activities."},{"p":37,"t":"Planned medium-term interventions under governance aim to consolidate achievements and further strengthen public service, rule of law, and security:"},{"p":37,"t":"Rule  of  Law  and  Judicial  Reforms:  Expand  e-justice  systems,  modernize  court infrastructure,  deploy  digital  case  management  in  all  courts,  establish  specialized commercial and employment courts, reduce average case resolution time to 18 months, and  employ  100  additional  High  Court  judges  and  200  magistrates,  with  continuous judicial training;"},{"p":37,"t":"ii) Anti-Corruption Measures: Strengthen enforcement, expand whistle-blower protection, enhance public participation in monitoring government accountability, institutionalize preventive  measures,  intensify  high-profile  prosecutions,  and  recover  stolen  public assets;"},{"p":37,"t":"iii) Public Service Transformation:  Accelerate  digitalization  of  government  services, implement performance-based management, streamline processes, and improve human resource capacity and service delivery at national and county levels;"},{"p":38,"t":"iv) Devolution:  Strengthen  oversight  and  accountability  in  counties,  promote  citizen engagement in budgeting and planning, and enhance County Governments' capacity to deliver core services;"},{"p":38,"t":"Security and Stability: Invest in police modernization, intelligence, community policing, border management, and counter-terrorism. Recruit 20,000 additional officers, provide modern equipment and vehicles, and improve police housing to enhance officer welfare and public safety; and"},{"p":38,"t":"vi) Institutional  Capacity  Building:  Strengthen  governance  and  oversight  institutions, including  the  Judiciary,  EACC,  Office  of  the  Auditor-General,  and  other  regulatory bodies, to improve efficiency, transparency, and compliance."},{"section":"1.3.12 Foreign Policy and Regional Integration"},{"p":38,"t":"1.3.12 Foreign Policy and Regional Integration"},{"p":38,"t":"134. Kenya's foreign policy continues to advance economic diplomacy, regional integration, and international partnerships, contributing to trade expansion, investment promotion, and political stability.  The  Government  has  strengthened  engagement  with  key  regional  and  international blocs, including the East African Community (EAC), Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa  (COMESA),  the  African  Union  (AU),  and  the  Intergovernmental  Authority  on Development  (IGAD),  ensuring  that  Kenya  leverages  its  strategic  position  in  regional  and continental affairs."},{"p":38,"t":"135. Key  achievements  include  the  negotiation  and  implementation  of  trade  facilitation agreements, promotion of regional infrastructure projects such as the Lamu Port-South SudanEthiopia  Transport  (LAPSSET)  corridor,  and  harmonization  of  cross-border  standards  to enhance intra-African trade. Kenya has also leveraged diplomatic channels to attract foreign direct investment (FDI), participate in regional peacekeeping and security initiatives, and support regional  industrialization  and  energy  projects.  Engagement  with  international  partners  has provided technical assistance, financing, and market access support for sectors prioritized under the Bottom-Up Economic Transformation Agenda (BETA)."},{"p":38,"t":"136. Over the medium term, the Government will implement targeted interventions to strengthen Kenya's position as a regional hub for trade, investment, and diplomacy. These include:"},{"p":38,"t":"Economic Diplomacy: Expansion of trade missions, investor roadshows, and bilateral/multilateral engagement to attract FDI and promote exports, particularly in agroprocessing, manufacturing, and services;"},{"p":38,"t":"ii) Regional Integration: Deepening engagement with EAC, COMESA, and AU frameworks to facilitate harmonized trade standards, efficient border management, and coordinated infrastructure development, including transport, energy, and digital corridors;"},{"p":38,"t":"iii) Institutional Strengthening: Capacity building within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and missions abroad to enhance negotiation, trade promotion, and consular services;"},{"p":38,"t":"iv) Peace, Security, and Stability: Active participation in regional peacekeeping, counterterrorism, and conflict resolution initiatives to ensure a stable environment conducive to trade and investment;"},{"p":38,"t":"Public-Private  Partnerships:  Collaboration  with  the  private  sector  to  identify  export opportunities,  leverage  diaspora  networks,  and  strengthen  Kenya's  regional industrial and service clusters; and"},{"p":38,"t":"vi) Continental Integration: Supporting Kenya's role in the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) to expand market access for local industries and increase participation in regional value chains."},{"section":"1.4  Roadmap  to  Harnessing  Human  Capital,  Technology,  Talent,  and Infrastructure"},{"p":39,"t":"1.4  Roadmap  to  Harnessing  Human  Capital,  Technology,  Talent,  and Infrastructure"},{"p":39,"t":"137. Having reflected on the achievements of the past three years under BETA, the Government is now shifting its policy focus toward harnessing capital, technology and talent to accelerate progress with minimal friction. Building on the foundations laid under BETA, the roadmap for Kenya's next level of development prioritizes on long-term industrial planning, investments in people, and the creation of competitive national capacities. Specifically, the Government will focus on four major national priorities: i) scaling up investment in people through education, skills development, scientific training, and innovation; ii) transforming the economy from a net importer to a net exporter of goods and services, with particular emphasis on agricultural and manufactured products; iii) ensuring abundant, reliable, and affordable energy, the lifeblood of a modern economy; and iv), developing efficient transport and logistics infrastructure to connect markets, lower the cost of doing business, and reinforce Kenya as the aviation and commercial hub of East and Central Africa."},{"p":39,"t":"138. The Government's next phase of transformation focuses on harnessing capital, technology, and talent to build a competitive, export-driven economy. This roadmap prioritizes long-term industrial  planning,  large-scale  investments  in  people,  expansion  of  productive  capacity,  and strategic infrastructure systems to position Kenya for accelerated and sustainable growth."},{"section":"1.4.1 Human Capital Development"},{"p":39,"t":"1.4.1 Human Capital Development"},{"p":39,"t":"139. Education remains the cornerstone of Kenya's human  capital development. The Government is committed to strengthening Education through continued investment in skills development, scientific training and innovation. Kenya has made notable progress in expanding access  to  education,  improving  infrastructure,  enhancing  quality  of  learning  and  advancing science, research, and innovation, all of which have contributed to better education outcomes. Education  plays  a  critical  role  in  lifting  communities  out  of  poverty  by  enhancing  labor productivity,  while  simultaneously  boosting  the  overall  productivity  and  adaptability  of  the workforce. Kenya's competitiveness, both regionally and globally, depends on a well -educated population supported by strong training and research systems."},{"p":39,"t":"140. To scale up Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) programmes in the  education  system,  the  Government  has  established  the  State  Department  for  Science, Research,  and  Innovation.  This  institutional  reform  is  designed  to  strengthen  innovation, promote research, and build a pool of high-level professionals in engineering and science. It also provides a framework for fully operationalizing the National Research Fund by progressively increasing  investment  in  research  and  innovation  from  the  current  0.8  percent  of  GDP  to  2 percent over the next ten years. Achieving this target will support the financing of start-ups, the scaling and commercialization of innovation, and the growth of technology-driven enterprises. These efforts will be supported by Government in collaboration with industry players in the private  sector.  In  addition,  targeted  funding  will  be  provided  for  the  development  and deployment of real-time trade intelligence and market analytics tools to enable local enterprises to  identify  high-demand  export  opportunities  such  as  floriculture  exports  to  China  and horticultural  produce  to  the  European  Union  and  align  production,  standards,  and  logistics accordingly."},{"section":"1.4.2 Sustainable Agriculture"},{"p":39,"t":"1.4.2 Sustainable Agriculture"},{"p":39,"t":"141. The Government recognizes that Kenya can no longer rely on rainfall alone to determine agricultural output or food security. Although the country is endowed with fertile arable land, only 15 percent supports rain-fed agriculture, while the remaining 85 percent of the land receives insufficient rainfall. To address this, the Government is prioritizing expanded modern irrigation"},{"p":40,"t":"as  a  key  pillar  of  national  agricultural  policy,  ensuring  that  arid  and  semi-arid  areas  are transformed into productive agricultural hubs."},{"p":40,"t":"142. Food security efforts will include large-scale modern irrigation, comprising 50 mega dams, 200 mini-dams and over 1,000 micro-dams nationwide to harvest and store water for irrigation and multiple-use purposes. These interventions will bring an additional 2.5 million acres under production  within  the  next  five  to  seven  years  to  support  agro-industrialisation  and  rural livelihoods,  securing  water  for  domestic  consumption,  crop  production  and  export-oriented agriculture. The Government has already mapped out the location of these dams, including High Grand  Falls  (Tana  River),  Isiolo-Barsalinga,  Sigly  canal  (Garissa),  Soin  Koru  (Kisumu), Rumuruti  (Laikipia),  Thuci  (Embu  &  Tharaka-Nithi),  Lowaat  (Turkana),  Muhoya  (NyeriKirinyaga),  Narosura  (Narok),  Arror  (Elgeyo-Marakwet),  Ndarugu  (Kiambu),  Kokwanyo (Homa  Bay),  Rare  (Kilifi),  and  Tongaren  (Bungoma),  among  others,  to  ensure  nationwide coverage."},{"section":"1.4.3 Energy"},{"p":40,"t":"1.4.3 Energy"},{"p":40,"t":"143. Energy is a foundational pillar of national development, and no modern economy can grow without abundant, reliable, and affordable power. As Kenya advances its economic transformation agenda, expanding energy generation and access remains a top national priority. Despite an installed capacity of 3,300 MW, it remains insufficient in meeting the demands of a rapidly  modernising  economy.  To  support  domestic  electrification,  industrial  manufacturing, agro-processing, e-mobility, green industrialisation and the digital economy, the Government will undertake an accelerated expansion of power generation. Kenya is endowed with diverse and underutilised renewable resources, including geothermal, solar, hydro, wind and nuclear, which  collectively  provide  a  strong  platform  for  sustainable  energy  growth.  The  increasing energy requirements of modern technologies such as data centres, artificial  intelligence,  and advanced manufacturing further underscore the urgency to scale up supply. Accordingly, the Government  will  prioritise  the  development  of  an  additional  10,000  MW  of  affordable  and dependable power over the next seven years to secure energy sufficiency, leveraging geothermal, hydro,  solar,  wind  and  nuclear  potential  to  support  manufacturing,  value  addition,  digital expansion, e-mobility and emerging technologies."},{"section":"1.4.4 Transport and logistics"},{"p":40,"t":"1.4.4 Transport and logistics"},{"p":40,"t":"144. The modernization and expansion of transport and logistics infrastructure is essential for driving  economic  growth,  strengthening  national  competitiveness  and  enabling  the  efficient movement of goods and people across the country. Efficient transport and logistics systems will reduce the cost of doing business, enhance market access, and support Kenya's role as a regional commercial and aviation gateway. To address existing infrastructure gaps, the Government will implement  a  comprehensive  ten-year  programme  that  includes  dualling  2,500  kilometres  of priority highways, tarmacking an additional 28,000 kilometres of roads,  and expanding strategic transport corridors through Public -Private Partnerships."},{"p":40,"t":"145. The  transport  and  logistics  investments  will  also  include  the  modernisation  of  Jomo Kenyatta International Airport, and building of a new world class international airport, the Ports of Mombasa and Lamu and reforms to restore the operational and financial stability of Kenya Airways. Major projects are already underway, including the dualling of the Rironi -Naivasha -Nakuru -Mau Summit and the Rironi -Maai Mahiu -Naivasha roads, with additional key corridors across the country earmarked for expansion to eliminate congestion and improve mobility. The extension of the Standard Gauge Railway from Naivasha to Kisumu and onward to Malaba has also already begun, marking a significant step toward enhanced regional connectivity."},{"section":"1.5 National Infrastructure Fund and Sovereign Wealth Fund"},{"p":41,"t":"1.5 National Infrastructure Fund and Sovereign Wealth Fund"},{"p":41,"t":"146. In order to transform the country into a first-world economy, the Kenya Kwanza Manifesto envisaged the establishment of an infrastructure Fund/Bank. The Government has taken a major in this regard, following Cabinet approval for the establishment of the National Infrastructure Fund and the Sovereign Wealth Fund, which will anchor long-term development and economic transformation. The National Infrastructure Fund will be established as a limited company with initial  capitalization  from  privatization  proceeds,  with  a  view  to  progressively  reduce  the financing  of  commercially  viable  infrastructure  projects  from  the  budget.  Through  domestic resource mobilisation, monetisation of mature public assets, democratisation of ownership via capital markets, and deployment of national savings, the Fund will crowd in large-scale private capital while reducing reliance on borrowing and taxation. All privatisation proceeds will be ring-fenced for infrastructure investment, with every shilling expected to leverage up to KSh 10 from  long-term  investors  such  as  pension  funds,  sovereign  partners,  private  equity  and development finance institutions."},{"p":41,"t":"147. In parallel, Cabinet approved the Sovereign Wealth Fund Policy, establishing a dedicated national fund to prudently manage revenues from mineral and petroleum resources, dividends from public investments, and a portion of privatisation proceeds. Anchored on inter-generational savings, fiscal resilience and commercially viable strategic investments, the Sovereign Wealth Fund will strengthen fiscal discipline, protect the economy from external shocks, and enhance long-term  competitiveness.  The  Fund  operationalizes  Article  201  of  the  Constitution  on generational equity, establishes a comprehensive framework for the prudent management and investment of revenues from mineral and petroleum resources, and advances the Kenya Kwanza Administration investment-led growth agenda."},{"p":41,"t":"148. Together,  the  National  Infrastructure  Fund  and  Sovereign  Wealth  Fund  will  finance Kenya's transformation agenda focused on food security, infrastructure expansion and energy -driven  industrialisation.  Both  funds  will  operate  under  strong  governance,  transparency  and accountability  frameworks,  with  professional  and  independent  management.  This  financing architecture represents a decisive shift toward a sustainable, investment-led development model that  mobilises  capital,  accelerates  delivery,  preserves  national  value  and  secures  long-term prosperity for present and future generations."},{"section":"II. RECENT  ECONOMIC  DEVELOPMENTS  AND  MEDIUMTERM OUTLOOK"},{"p":42,"t":"II. RECENT  ECONOMIC  DEVELOPMENTS  AND  MEDIUMTERM OUTLOOK"},{"section":"2.1 Global Economic Outlook"},{"p":42,"t":"2.1 Global Economic Outlook"},{"p":42,"t":"149. Global growth is estimated at 3.3 percent in 2025, underpinned by easing trade tensions, improved  financial  conditions,  and  resilient  consumer  and  business  spending.  Growth  is projected to remain at 3.3 percent in 2026, before easing marginally to 3.2 percent in 2027 (Table 2.1). The sustained resilience reflects continued investment in technology, particularly artificial intelligence, more flexible private-sector supply chains, and generally accommodative financial conditions.  However,  heightened  policy  uncertainty,  geopolitical  tensions,  and  the  risk  of renewed trade fragmentation continue to weigh on the global outlook."},{"p":42,"t":"Table 2.1: Global Economic Performance"},{"p":42,"t":"Source: IMF World Economic Outlook Update, January 2026."},{"p":42,"t":"150. In advanced economies, growth is expected to be moderate at 1.8 percent in 2026 and 1.7 percent in 2027 from an estimated 1.7 percent in 2025. The United States economy is projected to expand by 2.4 percent in 2026 from a growth of 2.1 percent in 2025, buoyed by strong business investment and resilient household spending, albeit amid ongoing trade-policy uncertainty. The euro  area  and  other  major  advanced  economies  are  anticipated  to  register  slower  but  stable growth, underpinned by domestic demand and wage gains, but constrained by weaker external demand and subdued business sentiment."},{"p":42,"t":"151. In  emerging  market  and  developing  economies,  growth  is  projected  to  moderate  to  4.2 percent  in  2026,  from  4.4  percent  in  2025.  China's  growth  outlook  remains  firm,  reflecting continued policy stimulus, increased policy bank lending, and lower effective US  tariff rates following the temporary trade truce. Growth in the Middle East and Central Asia is expected to accelerate  in  2026,  supported  by  higher  oil  output,  resilient  domestic  demand,  and  ongoing reforms.  In  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean,  growth  is  projected  to  slow  in  2026  before"},{"p":43,"t":"recovering in 2027, while emerging and developing Europe is expected to rebound from the sharp slowdown experienced in 2025 as the effects of earlier trade-policy shifts dissipate."},{"p":43,"t":"In Sub-Saharan Africa, growth is projected to strengthen from 4.4 percent in 2025 to 4.6 percent  in  2026  and  2027,  supported  by  macroeconomic  stabilization,  improving  domestic demand, easing inflationary pressures, and continued reform efforts in several key economies. Notwithstanding the improved outlook, the region remains exposed to risks arising from fiscal pressures, external financing constraints, and global economic uncertainty."},{"section":"2.2 Domestic Economic Performance"},{"p":43,"t":"2.2 Domestic Economic Performance"},{"p":43,"t":"The  Kenyan  economy  continues  to  demonstrate  significant  resilience  despite  facing multiple challenges from both domestic and external environments. Over the past three years (2022 -2024), the economy expanded at an average annual rate of 5.1 percent (4.9 percent in 2022, 5.7 percent in 2023, and 4.7 percent in 2024). This performance exceeds the global average growth rate of 3.5 percent and the sub-Saharan Africa average of 3.9 percent over the same period. This strong performance reflects the sound and deliberate policies implemented during the period, as well as the growing diversification of the economy, which has reduced reliance on any single sector."},{"p":43,"t":"The economy continued to demonstrate resilience in 2025, posting improved performance with growth of 4.9 percent, 5.0 percent and 4.9 percent in the first, second and third quarters respectively (Table 2.2). This growth was primarily underpinned by strong performance in the agriculture sector, a recovery of the industry sector, and the resilience of services sector. All economic sectors recorded positive growth rates in the first three quarters of 2025, with varied magnitudes across activities."},{"p":43,"t":"Table 2.2: Sectoral GDP Performance"},{"p":43,"t":"Source of Data: Kenya National Bureau of Statistics"},{"p":44,"t":"155. In 2025, the primary sector grew by 6.2 percent in the first quarter, 4.9 percent in the second quarter and 4.0 percent in the third quarter compared to a growth of 4.5 percent, 4.0 percent and 2.9 percent in the corresponding quarters of 2024 (Table 2.2). This was as a result of the robust growth in the agriculture, forestry and fishing sub-sector and a recovery in the mining and quarrying sub-sector. Activities in the agriculture, forestry, and fishing sub-sector expanded by 6.0 percent in the first quarter, 4.4 percent in the second quarter and 3.2 percent in the third quarter of 2025, compared to growth of 5.6 percent, 4.5 percent and 4.0 percent in the corresponding quarters of 2024. This performance was driven by favorable weather conditions experienced  in  most  parts  of  the  country  involved  in  crop  and  animal  production.  This  was evident in the significant increase in the production of milk, coffee, and vegetables, as well as exports of cut flowers. However, the subsector's performance was somewhat curtailed by a decline in tea and sugarcane production."},{"p":44,"t":"156. The mining and quarrying sub-sector grew by 10.8 percent in the first quarter, 15.3 percent in the second quarter, and 16.6 percent in the third quarter of 2025, compared to contractions of 16.1 percent, 5.5 percent, and 12.2 percent, respectively, in the corresponding quarters of 2024. This growth reflected increased activity and renewed investment following a period of subdued performance in the previous year."},{"p":44,"t":"157. In the first three quarters of 2025, the industry sector recorded a growth of 2.6 percent in the  first  quarter,  3.3  percent  in  the  second  quarter  and  4.1  percent  in  the  third  quarter,  an improvement from a growth of 1.5 percent, 0.5 percent and 0.3 percent, respectively, in the corresponding  quarters  of  2024.  This  growth  was  driven  by  improved  performance  across manufacturing, electricity and water supply, and construction sub-sectors."},{"p":44,"t":"158. The manufacturing sub-sector grew by 2.1 percent in the first quarter, 1.0 percent in the second quarter, and 2.5 percent in the third quarter of 2025, compared to growth of 1.9 percent, 3.2 percent, and 2.3 percent, respectively, in the corresponding quarters of 2024. This growth was supported by both food and non-food manufacturing activities. Within food manufacturing, the sub-sector benefited from strong increases in coffee auctions and milk deliveries. Non-food manufacturing also performed well, with increased production of cement and galvanized sheets, as well as increased assembly of motor vehicles."},{"p":44,"t":"159. The electricity and water supply sub-sector grew by 3.6 percent in the first quarter, 5.7 percent  in  the  second  quarter,  and  3.6  percent  in  the  third  quarter  of  2025,  representing  an improvement compared to growth of 2.8 percent, 1.2 percent, and 0.9 percent, respectively, in the corresponding quarters of 2024. Growth was driven by higher electricity generation, with solar,  wind,  and  geothermal  sources  contributing  significantly,  although  increases  in  thermal generation and a decline in hydro generation curtailed overall performance."},{"p":44,"t":"160. The construction  sub-sector  grew  by  3.0  percent  in  the  first  quarter,  5.7  percent  in  the second quarter, and 6.7 percent in the third quarter of 2025, up from growth of 0.4 percent and contractions of 3.7 percent and 2.6 percent, respectively, in the corresponding quarters of 2024. This performance was driven by increased consumption of key inputs such as cement, iron, and steel. Additionally, the quantity of imported bitumen increased during the period."},{"p":44,"t":"161. The services sector recorded growth of 4.8 percent in the first quarter, 5.5 percent in the second quarter, and 5.4 percent in the third quarter of 2025, compared to growth of 6.8 percent, 6.2  percent,  and  5.7  percent,  respectively,  in  the  corresponding  quarters  of  2024.  The transportation and storage sub-sector expanded by 3.7 percent in the first quarter, 5.4 percent in the  second  quarter,  and  5.2  percent  in  the  third  quarter  of  2025,  compared  to  growth  of  4.1 percent,  3.4  percent,  and  4.6  percent,  respectively,  in  the  corresponding  quarters  of  2024. Performance  in  this  sub-sector  was  supported  by  increased  activity  in  road,  water,  and  air transport, as well as railway operations."},{"p":45,"t":"162. The accommodation and food service sub-sectors grew by 4.1 percent in the first quarter, 7.8 percent in the second quarter, and 17.7 percent in the third quarter of 2025, compared to growth  of  38.1  percent,  35.0  percent,  and  22.9  percent,  respectively,  in  the  corresponding quarters of 2024. This growth was largely supported by increased visitor arrivals, as Kenya cohosted the African Nations Championship (CHAN) in the third quarter of 2025. International visitor arrivals through the two major airport, Jomo Kenyatta International Airport (JKIA) and Mombasa International Airport (MIA), increased during the first three quarters of 2025."},{"p":45,"t":"163. The information and communication sub-sector grew by 5.8 percent in the first quarter, 6.0 percent in the second quarter, and 4.5 percent in the third quarter of 2025, compared to growth of 9.2 percent, 6.7 percent, and 6.9 percent, respectively, in the corresponding quarters of 2024. This performance was supported by increases in both domestic and international mobile voice traffic, as well as higher mobile broadband data consumption."},{"p":45,"t":"164. The financial and insurance sub-sector recorded growth of 5.2 percent in the first quarter, 6.7 percent in the second quarter, and 5.4 percent in the third quarter of 2025, compared to growth of 9.6 percent, 8.0 percent, and 7.3 percent, respectively, in the corresponding quarters of 2024. The slower growth reflects the impact of easing interest rates, which moderated earnings from financial intermediation, alongside relatively modest credit growth to the private sector."},{"p":45,"t":"165. Leading indicators of economic activity point to improved performance in the fourth quarter of 2025. As such, full-year growth is estimated at 5.0 percent and projected to improve to 5.3 percent in 2026. This growth is supported by continued resilience of key service sectors and agriculture, and continued recovery of the industry sector. The outlook will be reinforced by the ongoing  implementation  of  priorities  under  Bottom-Up  Economic  Transformation  Agenda (BETA) (Figure 2.1)."},{"p":45,"t":"Figure 2.1: Annual Real GDP Growth Rates, percent"},{"p":45,"t":"Source of Data: Kenya National Bureau of Statistics"},{"section":"Inflation Developments"},{"p":45,"t":"Inflation Developments"},{"p":45,"t":"166. Overall year-on-year inflation has declined and remained below the mid-point of the policy target range of 5.0 ± 2.5 percent since June 2024. The stable inflation has been supported by: abundant supply of food attributed to favorable weather conditions coupled with government interventions;  lower  fuel  inflation  attributed  to  the  stability  of  the  exchange  rate  and  lower international oil prices. Inflation stood at 4.4 percent in January 2026 compared to 3.3 percent in January 2025 (Figure 2.2). The increase reflects the easing of monetary policy."},{"p":46,"t":"167. Core inflation remained muted at 2.2 percent in January 2026 from 2.0 percent in January 2025, mainly on account of lower prices of processed food items. Non-core inflation rose to 10.3 percent in January 2026 from 6.8 percent in January 2025, driven primarily by sharper increases in transport costs, as well as higher prices of vegetables, particularly tomatoes, carrots, onions, and cabbages, alongside pressures from utilities and energy."},{"p":46,"t":"Figure 2.2: Inflation Rate, Percent"},{"p":46,"t":"Source of Data: Kenya National Bureau of Statistics"},{"section":"Interest Rates Developments"},{"p":46,"t":"Interest Rates Developments"},{"p":46,"t":"168. The Central Bank of Kenya, through the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), has gradually eased monetary policy by lowering the Central Bank Rate (CBR) from 13.0 percent in August 2024  to  9.0  percent  in  December  2025 (Figure  2.3). This  measure  is  intended  to  augment previous policy actions aimed at stimulating bank lending to the private sector and supporting economic activity. It also seeks to ensure that inflationary expectations remain firmly anchored, while the exchange rate remains stable."},{"p":46,"t":"169. Short-term interest rates declined in line with the easing of monetary policy. KESONIA (the  overnight  interbank  rate)  declined  to  9.0  percent  in  January  2026  from  11.2  percent  in January 2025, while the 91-day Treasury bill rate declined to 7.7 percent from 9.6 percent over the same period. Similarly, the 182-day Treasury bill rate declined to 7.8 percent in January 2026 from 10.0 percent in January 2025, while the 364-day Treasury bill rate declined to 9.2 percent from 11.3 percent over the same period. The decrease in government domestic borrowing rates has contributed to lower debt-servicing costs."},{"p":46,"t":"170. Commercial banks ' average lending and deposit rates decreased in the year to November 2025 in tandem with the easing of the monetary policy. The average lending rate decreased to 14.9 percent in November 2025 from 17.2 percent in November 2024 while the average deposit rate also decreased to 7.3 percent from 10.4 percent over the same period. Consequently, the average  interest  rate  spread  increased  to  7.6  percent  in  November  2025  from  6.8  percent  in November 2024."},{"p":47,"t":"Figure 2.3: Interest Rates."},{"p":47,"t":"Source of Data: Central Bank of Kenya"},{"section":"Monetary and Credit Developments"},{"p":47,"t":"Monetary and Credit Developments"},{"p":47,"t":"171. Broad money supply, M3, grew by 9.8 percent in the year to December 2025, compared to a contraction of 0.2 percent in the year to December 2024 (Table 2.3). The improved growth of M3 was driven by higher growth in both Net Foreign Assets (NFA) and Net Domestic Assets (NDA),  particularly  credit  to  both  the  Government  and  the  private  sector.  The  NFA  of  the banking system grew by 40.7 percent in the year to December 2025, compared to a growth of 6.1 percent in the year to December 2024. The increase in NFA was mainly attributable to a rise in the Central Bank's foreign assets , while growth in commercial banks' foreign assets slowed during the period."},{"p":47,"t":"Table 2.3: Money and Credit Developments (12 Months to December 2025, KSh billion)"},{"p":47,"t":"Source of Data: Central Bank of Kenya"},{"p":48,"t":"Net Domestic Assets (NDA) improved to a growth of 4.3 percent in the year to December 2025, compared to a contraction of 1.2 percent over a similar period in 2024. The domestic credit extended by the banking system to the Government grew by 15.4 percent in the year to December 2025 compared to a contraction of 11.4 percent over a similar period in 2024 while lending to other public sectors contracted by 18.8 percent compared to a contraction of 33.8 percent over the  same  period.  Increased  net  lending  to  government  mainly  reflected  increase  uptake  of government securities by commercial banks. In contrast, lending to other public sector declined, mainly reflecting repayments by parastatals"},{"p":48,"t":"Growth in private sector credit from the banking system recorded a growth of 5.9 percent in the year to December 2025 compared to a contraction of 1.4 percent in the year to December 2024. Growth in credit to key sectors of the economy, particularly Agriculture, manufacturing, building and construction, Finance and insurance, and consumer durables, remained strong in December 2025. This mainly reflects improved demand for credit in line with the  declining interest rates."},{"p":48,"t":"The Monthly (month on month) credit flows to the private sector improved to KSh 31.9 billion in December 2025 due to the easing of the monetary policy stance to lower the cost of funds for banks (Figure 2.4). Sustained demand particularly for working capital due to resilient economic activities and the implementation of the Credit Guarantee Scheme for the vulnerable MSMEs will continue to support private sector credit uptake."},{"p":48,"t":"Figure 2.4: Private Sector Credit"},{"p":48,"t":"Source of Data: Central Bank of Kenya"},{"section":"External Sector Developments"},{"p":48,"t":"External Sector Developments"},{"p":48,"t":"175. The current account deficit stood at US$ 3,298.9 million (2.4 percent of GDP) in December 2025, compared to US$ 1,550.6 million (1.2 percent of GDP) in December 2024 (Table 2.4). The  current  account  balance  was  supported  by  resilient  goods  exports,  an  improvement  in services receipt and net primary income, and increased remittances. The current account deficit in the 12 months to December 2025 was more than fully financed by financial account inflows."},{"p":49,"t":"Table 2.4: Balance of Payments (USD Million)"},{"p":49,"t":"Source of Data: Central Bank of Kenya"},{"p":49,"t":"176. The balance in the merchandise account deteriorated by US$ 1,261.1 million to a deficit of US$. 10,995.3 million in December 2025 mainly due to an increase in import bill that more than offset the increase in exports. Goods exports increased by 6.1 percent, due to higher domestic exports particularly horticulture, coffee, manufactured goods, and apparel. Goods imports rose by 9.1 percent, reflecting increases in intermediate and capital goods imports."},{"p":49,"t":"177. Services receipts increased by 7.2 percent, mainly supported by increased receipts from travel services. The deficit on the primary account narrowed by US$ 46.8 million to a deficit of US$. 1,798.7 million in the year to December 2025, compared to the same period last year. Diaspora  remittances  increased  by  1.9  percent  to  US$  5,036.8  million  in  the  12  months  to December 2025 compared to US$ 4,945.2 million in  a  similar  period  in  2024.  Remittances increased forex inflows into the country, with some going to investment while others support household consumption of our people."},{"p":49,"t":"178. The capital account balance decreased by US$. 51.5 million to register a surplus of US$ 180.7 million in December 2025 compared to a surplus of US$ 232.2 million in the same period in 2024. Net financial inflows improved to US$. 5,266.7 million in December 2025 compared to US$. 3,213.6 million in December 2024 reflecting an increase in net financial liabilities, which more than offset the decline in net acquisition of financial assets. The net financial inflows were mainly in the form of Portfolio investments, direct investments, financial derivatives and other investments."},{"section":"Foreign Exchange Reserves"},{"p":49,"t":"Foreign Exchange Reserves"},{"p":49,"t":"179. The banking system's foreign exchange holdings remained strong at US$. 18,312.1 million in December 2025 from US$. 16,324.5 million in December 2024. The official foreign exchange reserves held by the Central Bank stood at US$. 12,098.6 million compared to US$ 10,066.6 million over the same period in 2024 (Figure 2.5). Commercial banks foreign exchange holdings decreased to US$. 6,213.6 million in December 2025 from US$. 6,257.9 million in December 2024."},{"p":50,"t":"180. The official reserves held by the Central Bank in December 2025 represented 5.2 months of import cover, compared to 4.4 months of import cover in December 2024. These reserves continue  to  provide  adequate  cover  and  a  buffer  against  short-term  shocks  in  the  foreign exchange market. The level of reserves also exceeds the minimum requirement of four months of import cover."},{"p":50,"t":"Figure 2.5: Foreign Exchange Reserves (USD Million)"},{"p":50,"t":"Source of Data: Central Bank of Kenya"},{"section":"Exchange Rate Developments"},{"p":50,"t":"Exchange Rate Developments"},{"p":50,"t":"181. The Kenya Shilling remained relatively stable against the US  Dollar,  exchanging at an average of KSh 129.0 in January 2026 compared to KSh 129.4 in January 2025. However, the Shilling depreciated against the Sterling Pound and the Euro by 9.1 percent and 13.0 percent, respectively. The Sterling Pound averaged KSh 174.3 in January 2026, up from KSh 159.8 in January 2025, while the Euro averaged KSh 151.4 compared to KSh 134.0 over the same period. Overall,  the  foreign  exchange  market  remained  well-supported  by  steady  inflows  from agricultural  exports  and  diaspora  remittances,  which  helped  cushion  the  Shilling  against excessive volatility (Figure 2.6)."},{"p":50,"t":"Figure 2.6: Kenya Shillings Exchange Rate"},{"p":50,"t":"Source of Data: Central Bank of Kenya"},{"section":"Capital Markets Developments"},{"p":51,"t":"Capital Markets Developments"},{"p":51,"t":"182. The stability of the Kenya Shilling against major international currencies, together with improved macroeconomic conditions, has boosted investor confidence. This has driven higher foreign direct investment inflows and increased participation in the Nairobi Securities Exchange (NSE). As a result, the NSE 20 Share Index improved by 52.4 percent to 3,295 points in January 2026, up from 2,163 points in January 2025. Similarly, market capitalization expanded by 55.2 percent to KSh 3,078 billion from KSh 1,984 billion over the same period (Figure 2.7). These levels represent the strongest performance of the NSE since the pre-COVID period, reflecting renewed confidence in Kenya's economic recovery and long -term prospects."},{"p":51,"t":"Figure 2.7: Performance of the Nairobi Securities Exchange"},{"p":51,"t":"Source of Data: Nairobi Securities Exchange"},{"section":"2.3 Fiscal Performance"},{"p":51,"t":"2.3 Fiscal Performance"},{"p":51,"t":"183. Budget  execution  progressed  well  during  the  first  half  of  the  FY  2025/26.  However, execution has been constrained by a combination of factors, including slower-than-anticipated adoption of the e-procurement system, revenue underperformance, and emerging expenditures pressures. To order to safeguard budget implementation while maintaining fiscal consolidation path, the Government has revised the fiscal projections for the FY 2025/26. The process has accommodated emerging revenue shortfalls and  critical  additional  expenditure  requirements, while ensuring alignment with approved fiscal targets."},{"section":"Revenue Performance"},{"p":51,"t":"Revenue Performance"},{"p":51,"t":"184. By the end of December 2025, total revenue collected including A-I-A amounted to KSh 1,500.6 billion against a target of KSh 1,637.7 billion (Table 2.5). The revenue collection was below target by KSh 136.1 billion. This performance is attributed to underperformance recorded in ordinary revenue of KSh 115.3 billion, and KSh 20.8 billion in Ministerial A-I-A."},{"p":51,"t":"185. The ordinary revenue collection was KSh 1,236.5 billion against a target of KSh 1,351.9 billion. All ordinary revenue categories except import duty recorded below target performance during the period under review. The total revenue recorded a growth of 12.4 percent compared to a growth of 1.6 percent recorded in December 2024."},{"p":51,"t":"186. The ministerial A-I-A collected amounted to KSh 264.1 billion against a target of KSh 284.9 billion, KSh 20.8 million below the target. The performance of A-I-A translated to a growth of 49.2 percent."},{"p":52,"t":"Table 2.5: Fiscal Performance as at 31 st  December, 2025"},{"p":52,"t":"Source of Data: National Treasury"},{"section":"Expenditure Performance"},{"p":52,"t":"Expenditure Performance"},{"p":52,"t":"187. The total expenditure and net lending for the period ending December 2025 amounted to KSh  2,024.4  billion,  against  a  target  of  KSh  2,097.0  billion.  The  resultant  below  target expenditure  of  KSh  72.6  billion  is  largely  attributed  to  below  target  disbursement  towards development expenditure and County Governments. Development expenditure was also below target by KSh 33.0 billion, while transfer to counties recorded a shortfall of KSh 50.4 billion mainly due to delayed disbursements. The recurrent expenditure was above target by KSh 10.9 billion  mainly  due  to  higher  than  targeted  expenditures  in  operations  &  maintenance,  and domestic interest (Table 2.5) ."},{"p":52,"t":"188. During  the  period  July  2025  to  December  2025,  the  fiscal  balance  including  grants amounted to KSh 518.1 billion (2.7 percent of GDP) against a targeted deficit of KSh 442.4 billion (2.3 percent of GDP). The deficit was financed by net foreign borrowing amounting to KSh 7.8 billion and net domestic financing of KSh 509.2 billion."},{"section":"2.4 Kenya's Macroeconomic Policy Outlook"},{"p":52,"t":"2.4 Kenya's Macroeconomic Policy Outlook"},{"p":52,"t":"189. Kenya's  economic  outlook  is estimated  to  have  expanded  by  5.0  percent  in  2025  and expected to strengthen to 5.3 percent in 2026 (see Table 2.6 for calendar years and Annex Table 1 for fiscal years). This performance is taking place against a broadly supportive global environment, where growth is estimated at 3.3 percent in 2026 and 3.2 percent in 2027, sustained by  easing  trade  tensions,  accommodative  financial  conditions  and  expanding  technology investment, particularly in artificial intelligence."},{"p":53,"t":"Table 2.6: Kenya's Macroeconomic Indicators and Projections"},{"p":53,"t":"Source: The National Treasury"},{"p":54,"t":"190. Kenya's  growth  p rojection  will  be  anchored  by  a  robust  agricultural  sector,  steady expansion in services, and a gradual rebound in industry. Agriculture is expected to benefit from favourable weather conditions, climate-smart investments, and Government initiatives aimed at improving  productivity  and  market  access.  Strong  linkages  between  agriculture  and  other sectors,  particularly  agro-processing,  exports,  and  rural  household  incomes,  will  continue  to support broad-based growth."},{"p":54,"t":"191. Industrial  activity  is  projected  to  firm  up  over  the  medium  term,  supported  by  easing production costs and a more stable exchange rate environment. The construction industry is set for a notable turnaround following the clearance of verified pending bills, which will help restart stalled  projects,  improve  liquidity  for  contractors,  and  stimulate  related  industries  such  as manufacturing and construction materials. Kenya's dynamic services sector, especially finance, ICT, and trade, is expected to retain momentum. Government efforts to promote sustainable tourism, expand community-based tourism models, and enhance port infrastructure to support cruise tourism will further lift hospitality and transport services."},{"p":54,"t":"192. On the demand side, private consumption and investment are expected to remain resilient, supported by a favourable macroeconomic environment. Lower inflation and prudent monetary policy  will  help  improve  household  purchasing  power  and  ease  cost  pressures  on  firms. Remittances, Kenya's largest source of foreign exchange, are projected to remain strong and provide an additional buffer for household consumption. The ongoing decline in lending rates will improve credit affordability for businesses and households, stimulating private investment, enterprise expansion, and job creation."},{"p":54,"t":"193. Private  sector  investments  will  also  be  bolstered  by  measures  aimed  at  improving competitiveness, reducing regulatory bottlenecks, and strengthening market efficiency. Positive investor sentiment, improved access to international markets, adherence to fiscal consolidation, and  a  more  stable  exchange  rate  anchored  on  credible  monetary  policy  and  sound  liabilitymanagement  practices  will  enhance  Kenya's  investment  climate.  The  expansion  of  PublicPrivate Partnerships (PPPs) is expected to play a major role in closing development infrastructure gaps. The harmonized Public Investment Policy, now fully operational, aligns PPP and Public Investment Management processes to ensure efficient, coordinated planning and execution of projects. Over the medium term, the Government will prioritize PPP investments across key sectors including Agriculture, Roads, Transport and Logistics, Urban Development and Housing, Energy, Water, ICT, Agribusiness and Manufacturing, and Health. There are currently 40 Public Private Partnership (PPP) projects, of which 10 are under implementation while 30 are in the pipeline at various stages of the PPP project cycle. In FY 2026/27, the Government targets to mobilize at least KSh 80 billion in private investment through PPPs. To strengthen openness, transparency, and accountability, the Government will continue to enforce compliance with the National Treasury Circular on Public Disclosure of Privately Initiated Proposals (PIPs) issued in April 2025, and enhance public participation at all critical stages of the PPP project lifecycle, in line with the PPP Act, including the publication of all intended and ongoing projects pursuant to Sections 43 and 69 of the PPP Act. Ongoing privatization of select State-owned enterprises will complement  these  efforts  by  improving  efficiency,  attracting  both  domestic  and  foreign investors, and creating fiscal space for priority development programs."},{"p":54,"t":"194. Growth in public consumption is expected to remain modest in line with the medium-term fiscal adjustment. Recurrent expenditure as a share of GDP is projected to gradually decline, while development spending is expected to rise to support implementation of BETA priorities. To  support  private-sector  liquidity  and  stimulate  economic  activity,  the  Government  will continue efforts to clear pending bills, especially those in the roads sector. These payments will be  facilitated  through  a  bond  issuance  by  the  Kenya  Roads  Board.  In  addition,  major"},{"p":55,"t":"infrastructure investments will increasingly leverage PPP arrangements to reduce pressure on the exchequer."},{"p":55,"t":"195. Kenya's external position is expected to remain stable over the medium term, supported by rising  exports  and  an  improving  global  environment.  The  implementation  of  key  trade agreements, stronger growth in Kenya's main regional markets in Africa, and lower international commodity prices will help strengthen export performance. The removal of certain export tariffs by China, and improved access to European Union markets, are expected to enhance Kenya's export competitiveness, boost foreign exchange earnings, and narrow the external imbalance. Continued resilience in agricultural exports, particularly horticulture and tea, will remain a core driver of external sector stability."},{"p":55,"t":"196. Stabilizing global economic conditions are expected to strengthen diaspora remittances and support continued growth in tourism and transport services. The expected rebound in service exports, particularly tourism, ICT-enabled services, and transport, will help cushion the economy against reduced income flows from declining donor support. Import growth is projected to pick up as domestic demand strengthens, supported by a stable exchange rate and industrial recovery. The  increase  in  imports  will  mainly  reflect  higher  demand  for  raw  materials  to  support manufacturing  and  industrial  activity,  as  well  as  consumer  goods  required  to  meet  rising household consumption."},{"section":"2.4.1 Monetary Policy Management"},{"p":55,"t":"2.4.1 Monetary Policy Management"},{"p":55,"t":"197. The Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) manages monetary policy with the primary objective of maintaining price and financial stability to support sustainable economic growth. The framework is anchored on an inflation-targeting regime, with the current target set at 5±2.5 percent. The introduction  of  core  and  noncore  inflation  measures  in  January  2025  has  enhanced  CBK's capacity to make data-driven policy decisions, with core inflation providing a more accurate reflection of underlying price trends and structural price pressures."},{"p":55,"t":"198. The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) continues to implement reforms outlined in the White  Paper  on  Modernization  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Framework  and  Operations.  These reforms  aim  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy,  strengthen  the  anchoring  of inflation expectations, and improve the overall transmission of policy decisions to the economy. Key  elements  include  the  shift  toward  a  forward-looking,  interest-rate-based  framework, strengthened liquidity management instruments, enhanced policy communication and transparency,  and  upgraded  market  infrastructure  to  deepen  financial  markets  and  support investor confidence."},{"p":55,"t":"199. A significant milestone in this transition is the introduction of a revised Risk-Based Credit Pricing  Model (RBCPM) for the banking sector to strengthen monetary policy transmission, enhance transparency in lending, and promote responsible credit allocation. Under the RBCPM, lending rates are linked to the Kenya Shilling Overnight Interbank Average rate (KESONIA), reflecting  borrowers'  risk  profiles  and  aligning  with  international  best  practices.  The  total lending rate comprises KESONIA plus a risk-adjusted premium ('K') that covers operational costs, expected returns, and borrower risk, while the total cost of credit includes applicable fees and charges. To promote transparency and informed borrowing, banks are required to publish weighted average lending rates, risk premiums, and associated fees for all lending products on their websites and on the Total Cost of Credit (TCC) platform."},{"p":55,"t":"200. In  a  major  step  to  modernize  Kenya's  financial  infrastructure,  the  CBK  extended  the operating  hours  of  the  Kenya  Electronic  Payment  and  Settlement  System  (KEPSS)  and  the national  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  (RTGS)  system,  effective  July  1,  2025.  This  strategic enhancement strengthens the efficiency, accessibility, and resilience of the country's payment"},{"p":56,"t":"ecosystem, supporting Kenya's transition toward a 24/7 digital economy, facilitating seamless crossborder transactions, and improving the country's competitiveness as a regional financial hub. These upgrades also promote financial inclusion by enhancing access to digital payment systems for households and businesses."},{"p":56,"t":"201. Looking ahead, monetary policy will continue to focus on preserving the credibility of the inflation-targeting framework, improving the transmission of policy rates to lending rates, and safeguarding  financial  stability.  Policy  efforts  will  ensure  that  monetary  conditions  remain supportive of private sector credit growth and broader economic activity, underpinned by prudent fiscal  management,  robust  financial  sector  oversight,  and  continued  development  of  digital financial infrastructure to enhance efficiency and inclusivity in the economy."},{"section":"2.4.2 Fiscal Policy and Outlook"},{"p":56,"t":"2.4.2 Fiscal Policy and Outlook"},{"p":56,"t":"202. The fiscal  policy  for  FY  2026/27  and  the  medium  term  will  be  anchored  on  a  growthsupportive consolidation strategy that advances the Government's priorities under Bottom - Up Economic Transformation Agenda (BETA) and the Fourth Medium Term Plan. The policy will also integrate the Government's emerging initiatives in human capital development, agricultural transformation, energy, and transport and logistics. This approach is intended to slow the pace of public debt accumulation, strengthen debt sustainability, and support the implementation of a proactive liability-management framework, while safeguarding the quality of public services. Fiscal  consolidation  efforts  will  prioritize  enhanced  domestic  revenue  mobilization,  rigorous expenditure optimization and reprioritization, and protection of essential government programs and social interventions."},{"p":56,"t":"203. The medium term fiscal projections in the 2026 Budget Policy Statement have been revised from those of the 2025 Budget Review and Outlook Paper (BROP) estimates taking into account budget implementation for FY 2025/26 and the available resource envelope. Over the medium term, as a percent of GDP, the Government's total revenu e including AiA is projected to increase from 16.9 percent of GDP in the FY 2026/27 to 17.5 percent of GDP in the FY 2027/28 and moderate to 17.0 percent of GDP in the FY 2028/29. Of the total revenue, ordinary revenue is projected to increase from 13.9 percent of GDP in the FY 2026/27 to 14.7 percent of GDP in the FY 2027/28 and moderate to  14.4  percent  of  GDP  in  the  FY  2028/29.  Total  expenditure  is projected to decrease from 22.5 percent of GDP in the FY 2026/27 to 21.4 percent of GDP in the FY 2027/28 to 20.6 percent of GDP in the FY 2028/29. Of the total expenditures, recurrent expenditure is projected to decline from 16.5 percent of GDP in the FY 2026/26 to 15.5 percent of GDP in the FY 2027/28 to 14.6 percent of GDP in the FY 2028/29 while development and net lending expenditure is expected to rise from 3.6 percent of GDP in the FY 2026/27 to 3.8 percent of GDP in the FY 2027/28 to 4.1 percent of GDP in the FY 2028/29."},{"p":56,"t":"204. In line with the fiscal consolidation plan, the overall fiscal deficit is projected to gradually decline from 5.3 percent of GDP in the FY 2026/27 to 3.6 percent of GDP in the FY 2027/28 to 3.3 percent of GDP in the FY 2028/29 (Table 2.7, Annex Tables 2 and 3) . This will boost the country's debt position and ensure the country's development agenda is sustainably funded ."},{"p":57,"t":"Table 2.7: Fiscal Framework"},{"p":57,"t":"Source of Data: National Treasury"},{"section":"Revenue Projections versus Nominal GDP Growth Rates"},{"p":57,"t":"Revenue Projections versus Nominal GDP Growth Rates"},{"p":57,"t":"205. Table  2.8 provides  projections  of  annual  growth  rates  of  total  and  ordinary  revenues compared to the growth rates of nominal GDP. In the FY 2026/27, total revenue is projected to grow by 5.7 percent while the nominal GDP is projected to expand by 10.2 percent. As a share of GDP, total revenue and ordinary revenue are projected at 16.9 percent and 13.9 percent in FY 2026/27, respectively."},{"p":57,"t":"Table 2.8: Revenue Projections Vs Nominal GDP"},{"p":57,"t":"Source of Data: National Treasury"},{"section":"2.4.2.1 Domestic Revenue Mobilization"},{"p":58,"t":"2.4.2.1 Domestic Revenue Mobilization"},{"p":58,"t":"206. Government will implement a mix of tax administrative and tax policy measures in order to boost revenue collection thereby supporting economic activity. In the FY 2026/27 and over the  medium term, the Government will focus on domestic resource mobilization efforts that include:"},{"p":58,"t":"Continued  implementation  of  the  National  Tax  Policy  and  the  Medium-Term  Revenue Strategy to progressively strengthen tax revenue  mobilization by simplifying  and harmonizing tax laws, rationalizing and targeting tax expenditures, and creating a simple, predictable and fair tax system."},{"p":58,"t":"ii) Deepening  tax  administration  reforms  through  sustained  investment  in  technology  to modernize  the  tax  framework,  improve  compliance,  broaden  the  tax  base,  strengthen customs valuation, and seal revenue leakages."},{"p":58,"t":"iii) Scaling up non-tax revenues by enhancing the capacity of MDAs to effectively generate income from public services and strengthen their operational systems to improve servicebased revenue performance."},{"section":"Fostering Fairness and Equity in Personal Income Tax"},{"p":58,"t":"Fostering Fairness and Equity in Personal Income Tax"},{"p":58,"t":"207. Personal Income Tax (PIT) is a central instrument for promoting fairness and equity within the tax system, as it is designed to ensure that individuals contribute to public finances in line with their economic capacity. For PIT to function effectively in this role, the tax burden must be shared broadly and applied consistently across income earners. Where compliance is uneven and concentrated on a narrow group of taxpayers, the redistributive role of PIT is weakened and confidence in the tax system is undermined. In Kenya, PIT performance has been characterized by strong compliance among formal sector employees and persistently low compliance among the self-employed. This imbalance has resulted in a system where income visibility, rather than ability to pay, largely determines tax contribution. As a consequence, formal sector taxpayers bear a disproportionate share of the PIT burden, while a large and economically active selfemployed population remains outside effective taxation. This outcome is neither equitable nor sustainable and places continued pressure on a limited segment of compliant taxpayers."},{"p":58,"t":"208. Fostering  fairness  and  equity  in  PIT  therefore  requires  deliberate  action  to  improve compliance among the self-employed and informal sector. Enhancing income visibility within this segment is essential to broadening the tax base and ensuring that PIT obligations reflect economic reality across different forms of employment. A broader and more inclusive PIT base reduces over-reliance on PAYE contributors and allows the tax burden to be shared more evenly among income earners. This approach is grounded in the canons of taxation, particularly equity, fairness,  certainty,  convenience,  and  economy.  Equity  is  strengthened  when  taxpayers  are assessed based on their economic capacity rather than the form in which their income is earned. Fairness  is  reinforced  when  individuals  with  similar  income  levels  are  subject  to  similar  tax treatment,  regardless  of  whether  they  are  formally  employed  or  self-employed.  Certainty  is enhanced when tax obligations are credible and consistently applied across all income earners, reducing perceptions that compliance is optional for certain groups."},{"p":58,"t":"209. At the same time, a focus on administrative efficiency ensures that compliance measures are  proportionate,  scalable,  and  cost-effective.  By  adopting  risk-based  and  data-informed approaches, the tax system can reduce reliance on intrusive enforcement methods while directing effort to areas of highest non-compliance. This supports the canon of economy by lowering the cost  of  collection  relative  to  revenue  yield,  while  also  improving  convenience  for  compliant taxpayers. Ultimately, fostering fairness and equity in PIT is not about increasing the burden on"},{"p":59,"t":"any one group, but about rebalancing the system so that all income earners contribute according to  their  ability  to  pay.  By  improving  compliance  among  the  self-employed  and  easing  the disproportionate  pressure  on  formal  sector  taxpayers,  the  PIT  system  can  better  fulfil  its redistributive role, strengthen tax morale, and support sustainable domestic revenue mobilization."},{"section":"2.4.2.2 Expenditure Reforms"},{"p":59,"t":"2.4.2.2 Expenditure Reforms"},{"p":59,"t":"210. The  Government  continues  to  implement  measures  to  enhance  expenditure  control  and ensure value for money in public spending. Key interventions include the continued enforcement of  austerity  measures  aimed  at  reducing  recurrent  expenditure,  rollout  of  end-to-end  eprocurement systems to increase transparency, continued implementation of governance reforms targeting  state  corporation  including  privatization,  and  piloting  of  the  Human  Resource Management  System  (HRMS),  which  is  being  deployed  across  all  National  Government Ministries and Departments as well as County Governments to improve wage bill management."},{"section":"Implementation of Treasury Single Account"},{"p":59,"t":"Implementation of Treasury Single Account"},{"p":59,"t":"211. To enhance public cash management, the Government is implementing the Treasury Single Account  (TSA) in three phases.  In  November  2025,  the  National  Treasury  issued  a  circular providing  guidelines  for  the  implementation  of  the  TSA  system.  The  TSA  aims  to  enhance efficiency  in  government  cash  management,  unify  government  banking  arrangements,  and provide  real-time  visibility  of  public  cash  resources,  thereby  strengthening  overall  fiscal transparency management."},{"p":59,"t":"212. Following its operationalization, all Ministries and Departments (MDAs), representing 100 percent coverage, were migrated to the TSA environment with effect from 1 st July 2025. During the FY 2025/26, the National Treasury will continue implementing the remaining TSA features, notably the automation of County Government exchequer processes, which is expected to be completed by the end of the financial  year.  In  addition,  inclusion  of  State  Corporations  and SAGAs daily cash balances in the TSA system through the CBK's Granular Data Integration (GDI) system to enable visibility of bank accounts in commercial banks."},{"section":"Accrual Accounting"},{"p":59,"t":"Accrual Accounting"},{"p":59,"t":"213. To improve cash management and enhance financial and fiscal reporting, the Government is in the process of transitioning from cash basis to accrual basis of accounting. The transition is being implemented over a three-year period (1 st July 2024 -30 th June 2027), in line with IPSAS 33 on first-time adoption of accrual accounting. The phased approach outlines the progressive recognition of assets and liabilities on public sector balance sheets."},{"p":59,"t":"214. In FY 2024/25, transitioning entities recognized financial assets and financial liabilities. In FY  2025/26,  entities  will  additionally  recognize  inventories  in  accordance  with  IPSAS  12 (Inventories), while progressively identifying non-financial assets and liabilities for recognition in FY 2026/27, to ensure full compliance with the IPSAS accrual framework. IPSAS 12 guides the recognition, measurement and expensing of inventories, including items held for sale, in production,  or  for  consumption  in  service  delivery.  With  audited  accrual-based  comparative figures for FY 2024/25 available, the FY 2025/26 financial statements will comprise:"},{"p":59,"t":"Statement of Financial Position (as at 30 th June 2026, with 2025 comparatives), reflecting financial  assets,  financial  liabilities  (IPSAS  41)  and  inventories  (IPSAS  12),  with disclosures on classifications, donated inventories, and inventories pledged as security."},{"p":59,"t":"ii) Statement  of  Financial  Performance  (for  FY  2025/26  with  2024/25  comparatives), including inventories expensed and any write-downs or reversals."},{"p":60,"t":"iii) Statement of Changes in Net Assets/Equity, Cash Flow Statement (direct method), and a Statement of Budget Information comparing budget and actual amounts."},{"p":60,"t":"iv) Related  accounting  policies,  notes  and  disclosures,  including  inventory  valuation methods (FIFO)."},{"p":60,"t":"215. The Public Sector Accounting Standards Board (PSASB), in concurrence with the National Treasury,  will  provide  standardized  reporting  templates  in  line  with  the  Public  Finance Management Act, 2012."},{"p":60,"t":"216. Entities  shall  apply  IPSAS  46  on  measurement,  with  guidance  to  use  historical  cost  or current operational value for assets, and cost of fulfilment for liabilities. Where estimates are required  during  transition,  they  shall  be  consistent  with  IPSAS  14  and  reflect  conditions prevailing at th e transition date, including market rates and management's best judgment for non-financial assets."},{"section":"Zero-based Budgeting Approach"},{"p":60,"t":"Zero-based Budgeting Approach"},{"p":60,"t":"217. The Government has entrenched Zero-Based Budgeting in budget preparation for the FY 2026/27.  The  IFMIS  Budget  Module  now  incorporates  standardized  costing  methodologies, allowing  Ministries,  Departments,  and  Agencies  (MDAs)  to  prioritize  spending  based  on program impact and fiscal efficiency. This approach ensures that FY 2026/27 and subsequent budgets are based on credible and cost-effective expenditure frameworks."},{"section":"Public Investment Management Reforms"},{"p":60,"t":"Public Investment Management Reforms"},{"p":60,"t":"218. Public  Investment  Management  (PIM)  reforms  aim  to  embed  fiscal  discipline,  climate resilience,  and  transparency  into  the  country's  capital  expenditure  framework.  The  PIM Regulations, 2022, now require Ministries, Departments, and Agencies (MDAs) to complete ongoing projects before starting new ones, thereby reducing fiscal risks and ensuring value for money. Additionally, all  projects  must  undergo  environmental  and  climate  risk  assessments, including  disaster  risk  evaluations,  to  ensure  investments  are  sustainable  and  aligned  with national climate commitments. These measures strengthen institutional credibility and protect public resources while positioning Kenya's investment portfolio to deliver long -term development impact."},{"p":60,"t":"219. To enhance efficiency and accountability, the Public Investment Management Information System (PIMIS) has been implemented across National Government MDAs, with expansion underway  to  County  Governments.  PIMIS  digitises  the  submission,  tracking,  approval, implementation, and monitoring of project concept notes, prefeasibility, and feasibility studies, while a PIM-PPP framework is being developed to integrate Public-Private Partnership projects into the system. To fully realise these reforms, ongoing training on the PIM framework and PIMIS usage is essential, equipping MDAs and counties with the skills to apply climate risk evaluation, enforce compliance, and leverage data analytics for decision-making. The national treasury  is  institutionalising  this  training,  alongside  stakeholder  engagement  and  oversight, which will be pivotal in ensuring that Kenya's public investments remain transparent, resilient, and impactful."},{"section":"National Assets and Liabilities Management Reforms"},{"p":60,"t":"National Assets and Liabilities Management Reforms"},{"p":60,"t":"220. The Government is committed to unlocking the full potential of its substantial and diverse public asset portfolio through the development of an Optimal Asset Utilization Framework. This strategic initiative aims to transform idle and underperforming assets into engines of growth and fiscal sustainability. Asset optimization provides a sustainable, non-tax revenue pathway that can reduce  reliance  on  borrowing,  ease  pressure  on  the  Exchequer,  and  eliminate  unnecessary"},{"p":61,"t":"acquisition of new assets. To complement this, the Government's effort to streamline operation and maintenance will enhance operational efficiency by reducing costly repairs and extending asset  life  cycles,  which  will  deliver  significant  expenditure  savings.  This  directly  supports ongoing revenue-enhancement measures and accelerates fiscal consolidation efforts."},{"p":61,"t":"221. When fully leveraged, these assets will strengthen fiscal sustainability, improve service delivery,  and  enhance  financial  performance  across  their  lifecycle.  Key  opportunities  for optimization  include  the  commercialization  of  public  land,  road  corridors/way  leaves  and training facilities, efficient allocation of office space, and leasing. Further, to bridge the resources gap, the Government is standardizing leasing practices across Ministries, Departments, Agencies (MDAs), and County Governments by developing a comprehensive Leasing Framework. This framework  will  provide  clear  guidelines  for  leasing  public  assets  and  attract  private  sector investment."},{"p":61,"t":"222. Further, to enhance asset and liabilities management, the Government has operationalized Assets  and  Inventory  Management  Modules  in  IFMIS,  with  State  Departments,  County Governments,  Commissions,  and  Independent  Offices  already  on  boarded  and  actively uploading  asset  registers.  This  enhances  transparency,  accountability,  and  efficiency  in managing  public  resources  by  providing  a  centralized  platform  for  tracking  and  reporting government  assets.  Asset  Tagging  and  Asset  Valuation  Policy  Frameworks  are  under development to ensure completeness and accuracy of asset registers. This is aligned with the accrual  accounting transition  roadmap, which requires all assets to be identified, valued  and recorded in the financial statement by 30 th June 2027."},{"section":"Pension Reforms"},{"p":61,"t":"Pension Reforms"},{"p":61,"t":"223. To  consolidate  and  advance  ongoing  public  service  pension  reforms,  the  Government continues to strengthen the Public Service Superannuation Scheme (PSSS) alongside legacy noncontributory pension arrangements, with a focus on sustainability, efficiency, transparency, and timely payment of benefits. Key reform interventions include the digitisation and re-engineering of pension administration processes, anchored on the deployment of an end-to-end Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) solution. This reform is designed to enhance data integrity, automate pension workflows, improve monitoring and reporting, and reduce processing timelines across the pension lifecycle - from enrolment and contribution management to benefit computation and payment. These reforms are aligned to the broader Public Finance Management framework and the Government's digital public service agenda, and are expected to deliver improved service delivery  to  pensioners  and  beneficiaries,  strengthen  compliance,  and  enhance  institutional accountability in the management of public pension obligations."},{"section":"Public Procurement Reforms"},{"p":61,"t":"Public Procurement Reforms"},{"p":61,"t":"224. To streamline public procurement processes and enhance integrity, the Government has undertaken significant legal, institutional and technological reforms. In part, the Government developed the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal (Amendment) Bill, 2025 to modernise Kenya's procurement legal framework in line with evolving governance, digitisation and local content  objectives.  Key  reform  areas  in  the  Bill  include:  enhancement  of  transparency  and accountability through mandatory disclosure and reporting requirements; strengthen the role of the  Regulator  to  enforce  standards,  compliance  and  sanctions  for  noncompliant  Procuring Entities;  promotion  of  local  content  and  preference  and  reservation  schemes,  especially  for youth, women and persons with disabilities; and provision a stronger legal basis for electronic procurement and framework contracting."},{"p":61,"t":"225. To operationalize procurement reforms and eliminate manual inefficiencies, the Government  has  prioritised  the  rollout  of  an  end-to-end  e-Government  Procurement  (e-GP)"},{"p":62,"t":"System. The system that was officially launched in July 2025, has shifted procurement processes from  fragmented  and  manual  processes  to  a  fully  digitised  procurement  platform.  Since  its rollout,  1,538 Procuring Entities have been registered, over 33,000 suppliers registered, over 22,000 staff trained, over 12,000 suppliers/contractors trained, 584 Annual Procurement plans published, 2100 tenders closed, and 223 contracts published in the e-Government Procurement system. In addition, the platform has been integrated with core Government systems, including: IFMIS,  Business  Registration  Services  (BRS),  e-Citizen,  and  i-Tax,  with  initial  on-boarding prioritising  National  Government  Ministries,  Departments  and  Agencies  (MDAs);  State Corporations; and County Governments. Next steps will include: full rollout of the system to Schools,  and  other  Procuring  Entities;  continuous  user  training  and  change  management  to improve adoption and system utilisation; and issuance of manuals and guidelines to assist users of the system."},{"section":"State Owned Enterprises' Reforms"},{"p":62,"t":"State Owned Enterprises' Reforms"},{"p":62,"t":"226. Many State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs) have continued to require recurrent budget support, on-lending, and Government guarantees, thereby creating significant contingent liabilities for the Exchequer. To mitigate these fiscal risks and reallocate public resources towards priority social  and  development  expenditures,  the  Government  is  implementing  a  comprehensive programme of SOE  reforms, including privatization, partial divestiture, and strategic partnerships. In January 2025, the Cabinet approved far-reaching reforms to streamline State Corporations  and  strengthen  governance,  accountability,  and  operational  efficiency.  These reforms entail:"},{"p":62,"t":"Merger of 42 State Corporations into 20 entities to improve operational efficiency and eliminate redundancy as some have duplicating and or overlapping mandates;"},{"p":62,"t":"ii) Dissolution of 25 State Corporations and their functions transferred back to their parent ministries or other State Corporations;"},{"p":62,"t":"iii) Restructuring six State Corporations to align their mandates for improved performance;"},{"p":62,"t":"iv) Declassification  of  four  public  funds  currently  categorized  as  State  Corporations  and transferring their functions back to the relevant ministries; and,"},{"p":62,"t":"Declassification of 13 professional bodies currently categorized as State Corporations to private entities with no exchequer budget."},{"p":62,"t":"227. The reform agenda is anchored in the Government-Owned Enterprises Act, 2025, which was passed by Parliament in October 2025 and assented to by the President in November 2025. The  Act  establishes a  comprehensive  legal  framework  for  governance,  oversight,  and performance management of Government-Owned Enterprises (GOEs), requiring them to operate as commercially viable entities under clear governance standards, including merit-based board appointments  and  robust  performance  contracts,  with  the  objective  of  enhancing  efficiency, transparency, and accountability while reducing fiscal risks to the Exchequer."},{"p":62,"t":"228. Consistent with this framework, the Government has approved the partial privatization of Kenya  Pipeline  Company  (KPC)  through  an  Initial  Public  Offering  (IPO)  on  the  Nairobi Securities  Exchange,  involving  the  sale  of  65  percent  of  Government  shareholding  while retaining a strategic 35 percent stake. The transaction is targeted for completion by 31 st  March 2026  and  is  expected  to  generate  approximately  KSh  100  billion,  contributing  to  domestic revenue mobilization and deepening capital market participation."},{"p":62,"t":"229. Further, the Government has agreed to a partial divestment of its stake in Safaricom PLC, involving the sale of 15 percent of its shares to Vodafone Kenya (part of the Vodacom Group) at  approximately  KSh  34  per  share,  raising  an  estimated  KSh  204  billion,  together  with  an"},{"p":63,"t":"upfront payment of KSh 40.2 billion in respect of future dividends, bringing total proceeds to about KSh 244 billion. Following the transaction, Government shareholding will stand at 20 percent, Vodafone at 55 percent, and public investors at 25 percent. The proceeds will be applied to  support  priority  national  infrastructure  investments  and  broader  economic  development objectives."},{"section":"Settlement and Resolution of Pending Bills"},{"p":63,"t":"Settlement and Resolution of Pending Bills"},{"p":63,"t":"230. The  Government  remains  firmly  committed  to  resolving  pending  bills  as  part  of strengthening fiscal discipline, supporting private sector liquidity, and restoring confidence in public financial management. Since its inauguration, the Pending Bills Verification Committee has received a total of 115,617 claims valued at KSh 664.8 billion. As at 31 st  December 2025, the Committee had analyzed 91,911 claims valued at KSh 637.6 billion, representing about 80 percent of the total number of bills submitted."},{"p":63,"t":"231. Of  the  analyzed  claims,  settlement  is  being  operationalized  through  specific  financing channels,  with  KSh  80.3  billion  of  pending  bills  related  to  the  roads  sector  earmarked  for settlement through securitization, while KSh 155.3 billion has been recommended for settlement in the FY 2025/26. This demonstrates steady progress toward clearing verified obligations while safeguarding  the  integrity  of  the  verification  and  settlement  process.  Going  forward,  the Committee will prioritize verification of the remaining 23,706 pending bills valued at KSh 27.2 billion, largely relating to the National Hospital Insurance Fund (now transitioning to the Social Health Authority) under the State Department for Medical Services, Kenya Wildlife Service under the State Department for Wildlife, Public Universities, and Sugar Companies."},{"section":"2.4.2.3 Deficit Financing Policy"},{"p":63,"t":"2.4.2.3 Deficit Financing Policy"},{"p":63,"t":"232. The  Government  will  continue  to  mobilize  resources  from  both  domestic  and  external sources to finance fiscal deficits to meet its debt maturities as guided by the Medium-Term Debt Management  Strategy.  External  financing  will  remain  focused  on  concessional  and  semiconcessional facilities from multilateral and bilateral partners, while commercial borrowing will be limited to liability management operations and to priority projects that are unable to secure concessional funding but are aligned to the national development agenda."},{"p":63,"t":"233. On the domestic front, the Government will prioritize the issuance of medium to long-term Treasury bonds to reduce refinancing risks and smoothen the redemption profile, while the use of short-term Treasury bills will be restricted to liquidity management purposes. In line with the PFM Act,  CAP  412A,  the  Government  will  also  continue  to  broaden  the  investor  base  and introduce  new  instruments  to  enhance  market  depth.  To  diversify  financing  sources,  the Government will explore alternative instruments including sustainability-linked bonds, diaspora bonds,  Samurai  bonds  and  Panda  bonds.  The  Government  remains  firmly  committed  to narrowing  fiscal  deficits  over  the  medium  term  to  contain  the  growth  of  public  debt  and safeguard fiscal sustainability."},{"section":"2.5 Risks to the Economic Outlook"},{"p":63,"t":"2.5 Risks to the Economic Outlook"},{"p":63,"t":"234. Kenya's economic outlook faces several downside risks that could constrain growth and challenge macroeconomic stability. Domestically, extreme weather events,  such as droughts, floods, and prolonged dry spells, pose significant threats to agricultural output. Disruptions in food production could lead to elevated food prices, fuelling inflationary pressures and reducing household purchasing power. Climate-related damage to infrastructure, including roads, bridges, and  irrigation  systems,  could  further  disrupt  economic  activities  and  increase  Government"},{"p":64,"t":"spending  on  emergency  response  and  reconstruction,  diverting  resources  from  development priorities."},{"p":64,"t":"235. On the external front, rising costs of imported fuel and food, driven by global supply shocks, geopolitical tensions, or trade restrictions, could amplify inflation and increase production costs for businesses. Volatility in international financial markets, fluctuations in commodity prices, and tighter global financing conditions may also adversely affect investment flows and exchange rate stability. Uncertainty surrounding trade policies, tariffs, or regional trade agreements could further impede export growth and cross-border commerce."},{"p":64,"t":"236. Despite these potential headwinds, there are significant upside opportunities. Accelerated implementation of structural reforms under BETA and the Fourth Medium-Term Plan, including enhanced public financial management, improved expenditure efficiency, governance reforms, and streamlined business regulations, could boost investor confidence, attract private investment, and spur economic activity. A supportive global economic environment, characterized by stable commodity prices, declining oil prices, and robust external demand, could further strengthen export  earnings,  foreign  exchange  inflows,  and  overall  economic  resilience.  Additionally, Kenya's transition to climate -smart agriculture, renewable energy investments, and enhanced disaster  preparedness  can  mitigate  some  domestic  risks,  supporting  more  sustainable  and inclusive growth."},{"p":64,"t":"237. Sustained  coordination  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  will  remain  critical  in maintaining a stable macroeconomic environment conducive to investment, savings, and growth. The Government will continue to closely monitor both domestic and international developments and implement timely policy interventions to shield the economy from adverse shocks, while promoting structural transformation and resilience in key sectors such as agriculture, energy, manufacturing, and services."},{"section":"III. BUDGET FOR FY 2026/27 AND THE MEDIUM TERM"},{"p":65,"t":"III. BUDGET FOR FY 2026/27 AND THE MEDIUM TERM"},{"section":"3.1 Fiscal Framework for FY 2026/27 and Medium-Term Budget"},{"p":65,"t":"3.1 Fiscal Framework for FY 2026/27 and Medium-Term Budget"},{"p":65,"t":"238. The FY 2026/27 budget and the medium-term expenditure framework are anchored on the Government's policy priorities and the macroeconomic strategy outlined in Chapters I and II. In advancing  the  Bottom-Up  Economic  Transformation  Agenda  (BETA),  the  Government  will sustain  its  growth-supportive  fiscal  consolidation  efforts  by  restraining  expenditures  and strengthening revenue mobilization. This approach is intended to moderate the pace of public debt accumulation while ensuring that delivery of essential public services remains uncompromised."},{"section":"Revenue Projections"},{"p":65,"t":"Revenue Projections"},{"p":65,"t":"239. Total  revenues,  inclusive  of  Appropriation-in-Aid,  are  projected  at  KSh  3,533.7  billion (16.9 percent of GDP) in FY 2026/27, up from the projected KSh 3,352.1 billion (17.6 percent of GDP) in FY 2025/26. Within this, ordinary revenue is expected to reach KSh 2,901.9 billion (13.9 percent of GDP), compared to the projected KSh 2,744.4 billion (14.4 percent of GDP) in FY 2025/26 (Annex  Tables  2  and  3) .  Revenue  performance  will  be  supported  by  ongoing reforms in tax policy and revenue administration aimed at broadening the tax base and enhancing compliance."},{"section":"Expenditure Projections"},{"p":65,"t":"Expenditure Projections"},{"p":65,"t":"240. Overall expenditures and net lending are projected at KSh 4,703.9 billion (22.5 percent of GDP) in FY 2026/27, compared to KSh 4,532.8 billion (23.9 percent of GDP) projected for FY 2025/26. The FY 2026/27 expenditure outlook comprises recurrent spending of KSh 3,456.9 billion (16.5 percent of GDP); development expenditure of KSh 749.5 billion (3.6 percent of GDP); transfers to County Governments amounting to KSh 495.5 billion; and an allocation of KSh 2.0 billion to the Contingency Fund."},{"section":"Deficit Financing"},{"p":65,"t":"Deficit Financing"},{"p":65,"t":"241. Based on the projected revenue and expenditure framework, the fiscal deficit including grants is expected to reach KSh 1,115.8 billion (5.3 percent of GDP) in FY 2026/27, from the projected deficit of KSh 1,140.7 billion (6.0 percent of GDP) in FY 2025/26."},{"p":65,"t":"242. The FY 2026/27 fiscal deficit will be financed through net external borrowing amounting to KSh 225.5 billion (1.1 percent of GDP) and net domestic financing of KSh 890.4 billion (4.2 percent of GDP)."},{"section":"3.2 FY 2026/27 and Medium-Term Budget Priorities"},{"p":65,"t":"3.2 FY 2026/27 and Medium-Term Budget Priorities"},{"p":65,"t":"243. The FY 2026/27 and the Medium-Term Framework will continue the implementation of the Bottom-up Economic Transformation Agenda (BETA) as prioritized in the Medium-Term Plan (MTP) IV of the Kenya Vision 2030. The Agenda is geared towards economic turnaround and inclusive growth, and aims to increase investments in the five core pillars envisaged to have the largest impact to the economy as well as on household welfare. These include: Agricultural Transformation and Inclusive Growth; Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise (MSME); Housing and Settlement; Healthcare; and Digital Superhighway and Creative Industry."},{"p":65,"t":"244. The  Government  will  prioritize  implementation  of  strategic  interventions  under  the following  key  enablers:  Infrastructure;  Manufacturing;  Blue  Economy;  Services  Economy, Environment and Climate Change; Education and Training; Women Agenda; Social Protection;"},{"p":66,"t":"Sports,  Culture  and  Arts;  Youth  Empowerment  and  Development  Agenda;  Governance;  and Foreign Policy and Regional Integration."},{"section":"3.3 Budgetary Allocations for the FY 2026/27 and the Medium-Term"},{"p":66,"t":"3.3 Budgetary Allocations for the FY 2026/27 and the Medium-Term"},{"p":66,"t":"245. The total budget for FY 2026/27 is projected at KSh 4,737.5 billion. The allocations to the three  Arms  of  Government  including  sharable  revenues  to  the  County  Governments  is summarized in Table 3.1 ."},{"p":66,"t":"Table 3.1: Summary Budget Allocations for the FY2026/27 -2028/29 (KSh Million)"},{"p":66,"t":"Source: The National Treasury"},{"section":"Criteria for Resource Allocation"},{"p":66,"t":"Criteria for Resource Allocation"},{"p":66,"t":"246. Resource allocation for the BETA priority programmes will be undertaken through a value chain approach under five sectors namely: Finance and Production; Infrastructure; Environment and Natural Resources; Social Sectors; and Governance and Public Administration. The nine (9) identified key value chain areas for implementation include: Leather; Cotton; Dairy; Edible Oils; Tea; Rice; Blue Economy; Natural Resources (including Minerals and Forestry); and Building Materials. This process ensures there is no break in the cycle in the resource allocations for a value chain. The process will ensure adequate resources are allocated to any entity along the value chain and elimination of duplication of roles and budgeting of resources. Spending in these essential  interventions  is  aimed  at  achieving  quality  outputs  and  outcomes  with  optimum utilization of resources. The momentum and large impact they will create will raise economic vibrancy and tax revenues."},{"p":67,"t":"247. MDAs are expected  to  ensure  efficiency  in  allocation  of  resources  through  zero  based budgeting and reviewing the portfolio of externally funded projects. MDAs are also encouraged to  restructure  and  re-align  their  spending  plans  with  the  Government  priority  programmes. Realization of these objectives will be within the hard budgetary constraint and ceilings provided in this BPS. The following criteria will serve as a guide for allocating resources:"},{"p":67,"t":"Linkage of programmes with the value chains of the Bottom-Up Economic Transformation Agenda priorities;"},{"p":67,"t":"ii) Linkage of the programme with the priorities of Medium-Term Plan IV of the Vision 2030;"},{"p":67,"t":"iii) Linkage of programmes that support mitigation and adaptation of climate change;"},{"p":67,"t":"iv) Completion of ongoing projects, viable stalled projects and payment of verified pending bills;"},{"p":67,"t":"Degree to which a programme addresses job creation and poverty reduction;"},{"p":67,"t":"vi) Degree  to  which  a  programme  addresses  the  core  mandate  of  the  MDAs,  Expected outputs and outcomes from a programme;"},{"p":67,"t":"vii) Cost effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability of the programme; and"},{"p":67,"t":"viii) Requirements for furtherance and implementation of the Constitution."},{"p":67,"t":"248. The baseline estimates reflect the current ministerial spending levels in sector programmes. In the recurrent expenditure category, non-discretionary expenditures take first charge. These include payment of public debts and interest therein, salaries and pensions."},{"p":67,"t":"249. Development  expenditures  have  been  allocated  on  the  basis  of  the  flagship  projects  in Vision 2030, the Bottom - Up Economic Transformation Agenda and the MTP IV Priorities. The following criteria was used in apportioning capital budget:"},{"p":67,"t":"On-going projects: emphasis was given to completion of on-going capital projects and in particular infrastructure projects with high impact on poverty reduction, equity and employment creation;"},{"p":67,"t":"Counterpart funds: priority was given to adequate allocations for donor counterpart funds which is the portion that the Government must finance in support of the projects financed by development partners; and"},{"p":67,"t":"Strategic policy interventions: further priority was given to policy interventions covering the entire nation, regional integration, social equity and environmental conservation."},{"section":"3.4 Details of Sector Priorities"},{"p":67,"t":"3.4 Details of Sector Priorities"},{"p":67,"t":"250. Table 3.2 provides the projected baseline ceilings for the FY 2026/27 and the mediumterm, classified by sector. Annex Table 4 provides a summary of expenditures by programmes for the FY 2025/26 -2028/29 period."},{"p":68,"t":"Table 3.2: Summary of Budget Allocations for the FY2026/27 -2028/29 (KSh Million)"},{"p":68,"t":"Source of Data: National Treasury"},{"section":"Agriculture Rural and Urban Development Sector"},{"p":68,"t":"Agriculture Rural and Urban Development Sector"},{"p":68,"t":"251. The ARUD sector encompasses five key sub-sectors: the State Departments for Agriculture, Blue Economy and Fisheries, Lands and Physical Planning, Livestock Development, and the National  Land  Commission.  It  is  instrumental  in  executing  Kenya's  development  agenda, aligning  with  Vision  2030,  Medium-Term  Plans,  the  Bottom-Up  Economic  Transformation Agenda (2022-2027), the Agricultural Sector Transformation and Growth Strategy (2019-2029), Sustainable Development Goals, and other policies."},{"p":69,"t":"During  FY  2022/23  to  2024/25,  the  sector  supported  agricultural  diversification  and technology transfer by distributing over 3.5 million seedlings-including macadamia, avocado, coconut, cashew nuts, coffee, and pawpaw-and supplying approximately 1.1 million metric tonnes of fertilizer and 40,000 metric tonnes of lime to over 3.1 million beneficiaries. Insurance coverage was extended to nearly 250,000 farmers across 41 counties, focusing on crops like maize, potatoes, and green grams. Six fish landing sites were rehabilitated to enhance processing and value addition, while grants totaling KSh 3.37 billion supported over 83,000 members of Common Interest Groups to promote livelihood diversification and reduce fishing pressure. The sector also developed fisheries management plans for lobster, marine aquariums, small purse seine fishing, and Lake Turkana"},{"p":69,"t":"In land management, the sector registered over 1.2 million title deeds, established geodetic control points, geo-referenced land parcels, settled over 33,500 households-including squatters and landless individuals-and processed more than 10,000 allotment letters to improve land governance. It issued land use advisories, resolved disputes through various mechanisms, and developed policies and bills for livestock development. Additionally, the sector inspected and certified nearly 17,000 milk handling premises, conducted extensive milk quality testing, and produced millions of semen straws for breeding programs."},{"p":69,"t":"Looking  ahead  to  2026/27-2028/29,  the  sector  aims  to  enhance  land  rights,  secure livelihoods, and promote sustainable land use. Priorities include issuing over 1.3 million title deeds, resolving 6,000 land disputes, and installing 17 COR stations for geo-referencing land parcels. Fishery development will focus on constructing 26 landing sites and completing key aquaculture centers. The sector plans to produce millions of semen straws, inspect thousands of milk premises, vaccinate cattle against Foot and Mouth Disease, and supply fertilizers and soil health  services  to  millions  of  farmers.  Industrial  crop  expansion  will  be  supported  through increased production of edible oil, cotton seed, and palm seedlings."},{"p":69,"t":"Funding allocations for these initiatives are projected at KSh 97 billion in FY 2026/27, KSh 91.2  billion  in  FY  2027/28,  and  KSh  101.6  billion  in  FY  2028/29,  reflecting  the  sector's commitment to sustainable development and economic growth."},{"section":"Energy, Infrastructure, and ICT (EII) Sector"},{"p":69,"t":"Energy, Infrastructure, and ICT (EII) Sector"},{"p":69,"t":"The  Energy,  Infrastructure,  and  ICT  (EII)  Sector  is  crucial  to  Kenya's  socio-economic development, serving as both a driver and enabler across various sectors. It aims to promote sustainable infrastructure in roads, transport, housing, digital connectivity, and energy, aligning with  Kenya Vision  2030,  Bottom-Up Economic Transformation Agenda  (BETA), the Fourth Medium-Term Plan (MTP IV) 2023-2027, regional commitments like Africa Agenda 2063, and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)."},{"p":69,"t":"The sector has made significant progress. In roads, over 1,798 kilometres were constructed, and routine maintenance covered more than 102,561 kilometres. Key milestones also include acquiring the MV Uhuru II ferry, completing the Miritini-Mombasa railway link, and upgrading major ports with new cranes. The affordable housing program completed 2,185 units, while the Kenya  Informal  Settlement  Improvement  Project  (KISIP  II)  delivered  infrastructure  such  as security  and  floodlights,  access  roads,  drainage  systems,  and  created  thousands  of  jobs. Additionally, designs and supervision for new government buildings and pedestrian bridges have enhanced mobility and service delivery."},{"p":69,"t":"ICT advancements included laying 7,152 kilometres of fiber optic cables, connecting over 1,100  public  institutions  and  82  hospitals,  digitizing  17,668  Government  services  via  the  eCitizen  platform.  To  improve  access  to  information,  17,521  TV  news  items  were  produced covering  BETA  activities  and  other  national priorities,  73,323  print  news  items  were"},{"p":70,"t":"disseminated, 150 MyGov pull-out editions were produced and disseminated, and three editions of the Kenya Yearbook were published and distributed. The Ajira Digital Programme trained over 1.5 million youths, promoting digital inclusion. The energy sector increased capacity by 160 MW, connecting over 1.1 million new customers, and expanded off-grid solutions with minigrids  and  solar  home  systems. The  petroleum  sector  supported  clean  cooking  initiatives  and stabilized fuel prices."},{"p":70,"t":"259. Looking ahead, the sector plans to expand infrastructure with 1,891 km of new roads and extensive  maintenance.  From  the  FY  2026/27  to  2030/31,  the  Roads  Subsector  intends  to upgrade 28,000 kilometers to bitumen standards and participate in investing in dualling of 2,500 Km of roads. The amount required for these upgrades cannot be met through contemporary funding. The Government intends to fund the financing gap from several alternative financing mechanisms including securitization of a portion of the Fuel Levy Fund, National Infrastructure Fund, and Public Private Partnership. Other priorities include modernizing the railway system, completing  port  berths,  establishing  logistic  hubs,  and  enhancing  maritime  safety  through programs like Vijana Baharia. Housing targets include constructing over 505,000 units and 506 markets. Energy plans involve adding 275.5 MW of capacity, drilling geothermal wells, and connecting 900,000 new customers. Digital infrastructure will see the installation of 37,645 km of  fibre,  internet  access  for  18,680  institutions,  and  27,516  Wi-Fi  hotspots,  aiming  for  full automation of government services."},{"p":70,"t":"260. To improve access to information, the Kenya News Agency will be revamped, the Postal Corporation of Kenya and Kenya Broadcasting Corporation will be revitalized, broadcasting and telecommunications infrastructure will be rolled out in unserved and underserved areas, mass media skills  will  be  developed  through  the  Kenya  Institute  of  Mass  Communication,  KIMC Eldoret Campus will be established, Studio Mashinani will be established in the remaining 41 counties, National  Addressing System  will be installed countrywide,  and  Government advertising  services  will  be  digitized.  The  petroleum  sector  will  focus  on  oil  production  in Turkana, resource evaluation, and expanding LPG reticulation in social housing. In addition, the Sector  plans  to  fully  integrate  the  Kenya  Export  Guide  into  national  program  to  provide automated, paperless works flows for documentation like certificates of origin as well as have a paperless  customs  system  that  connect  with  regional  partners  to  double  intra-African  trade through digital corridors."},{"p":70,"t":"261. Funding for these initiatives are projected at KSh 594.6 billion for FY 2026/27, KSh 894.6 billion for FY 2027/28, and KSh 894.9 billion for FY 2028/29."},{"section":"General Economic and Commercial Affairs Sector"},{"p":70,"t":"General Economic and Commercial Affairs Sector"},{"p":70,"t":"262. The  General  Economic  and  Commercial Affairs  (GECA)  Sector  plays  a  vital  role  in fostering  economic  growth  through  policy  development,  programme  implementation,  and project  execution  that  promote  trade,  industrialization,  investment,  enterprise  development, market access, private sector growth, employment, and competitiveness at local, regional, and international  levels.  It  also  emphasizes  environmental  conservation  and  climate  change mitigation in its initiatives."},{"p":70,"t":"263. Between 2022/23 and 2024/25, the sector achieved significant progress across various subsectors. Key accomplishments include the implementation of policies and reforms aligned with government priorities, growth in membership of SASRA-regulated SACCOs to 7.4 million, and the construction of 21 County Aggregation and Industrial Parks. The modernization of Rivatex machinery, registration of 6,392 industrial property rights, and training of over 13,000 students and SMEs in industrial and entrepreneurial skills highlight the sector's focus on innovation and capacity building."},{"p":71,"t":"264. Employment creation was notable, with 62,304 jobs generated against a target of 75,496, supported by investments totalling KSh 3,798 billion domestically and USD 1.503 billion in foreign  direct  investment.  The  MSMEs  sub-sector  disbursed  KSh  72  billion  through  the Financial Inclusion Fund  and  KSh  4.86  billion  via  Kenya  Industrial  Estates, creating approximately 290,000 jobs.  International  visitor  arrivals  increased  from  1.65  million  to  2.4 million, with earnings rising from KSh 297.3 billion to KSh 458.2 billion, driven by marketing efforts and the Electronic Travel Authorization system."},{"p":71,"t":"Kenya's total export value grew from KSh 1,007.9 billion to KSh 1,112.3 billion, supported by trade agreements with the EU, UK, and UAE. Regional policy development and capacity building  included  training  436  youth,  women,  and  persons  with  disabilities  on  the  EAC Simplified Trade Regime. The ASALs and Regional Development sub-sector completed key projects  such  as  leather  processing,  mango  processing,  land  rehabilitation,  and  irrigation, benefiting thousands of households and livestock"},{"p":71,"t":"266. Looking  ahead  to  2026/27  and  beyond,  the  sector  plans  to  implement  16  programmes aligned  with  Kenya  Vision  2030  and  BETA  priorities.  These  include  initiatives  in  regional development,  trade  promotion,  industrial  growth,  standards,  MSME  support,  digitization, investment promotion, tourism, regional integration, and administrative support. Going forward, the  sector  will  pivot  from  primary  exports  towards  an  export-led  manufacturing  economy through the establishment of commercial offices in high-potential markets identified under the Route  to  Market  (RTM)  Strategy  2025-2027,  alongside  the  creation  of  a  dedicated  export development  fund  and  risk-sharing  guarantee  scheme  to  support  market  development  and diversification into new products."},{"p":71,"t":"267. The sector's budget is projected at KSh 62.2 billion for FY 2026/27, increasing to KSh 70.5 billion in FY 2027/28 and KSh 72.7 billion in FY 2028/29."},{"section":"Health Sector"},{"p":71,"t":"Health Sector"},{"p":71,"t":"268. The health sector in Kenya continues to advance its commitment to the constitutional right to health, aligning with national development frameworks such as Vision 2030, MTP IV, and BETA. Guided by the Kenya Health Policy (2014-2030) and Universal Health Coverage (UHC), significant progress has been made from FY 2022/23 to 2024/25 in strengthening community health systems, expanding specialized services, and implementing health financing reforms."},{"p":71,"t":"During this period, the sector expanded Primary Health Care Networks to 228 out of 315 facilities and deployed 107,831 Community Health Promoters, improving household care for over 7.8 million families. Public health capacity was enhanced with antimicrobial resistance testing  laboratories  increasing  from  17  to  28.  Child  health  indicators  remained  strong,  with Vitamin A  supplementation  and  Penta-3  immunization  coverage  exceeding  83  percent.  HIV prevalence decreased from 3.7 percent to 3.03 percent, ART coverage reached 87 percent, and malaria incidence declined by 27 percent. TB treatment success improved to 89 percent, and screening  for  hypertension  and  diabetes  expanded.  Early  cancer  detection  services  were introduced in 30 counties."},{"p":71,"t":"Availability of essential medicines increased to 62 percent, digitalization of health facilities reached 18 percent, and blood collection totalled 333,533 units. Human resource capacity was strengthened through the placement of 16,810 interns, evaluation of 229 training institutions, and registration of 4,281 previously unregulated health professionals"},{"p":71,"t":"Specialized and referral services expanded significantly, with national hospitals performing complex surgeries, oncology treatments, dialysis, imaging, and transplants. Notable milestones included Kenya's first renal artery bypass surgery and advanced cancer imaging. Enrolment at"},{"p":72,"t":"Kenya  Medical  Training  College  increased  from  25,889  to  35,513,  alongside  infrastructure upgrades across county facilities."},{"p":72,"t":"272. Health financing reforms progressed with the rollout of the Social Health Insurance Fund (SHIF), Primary Health Care Fund (PHC-F), and Emergency, Chronic, and Critical Illness Fund (ECCIF). Funding for these initiatives increased to KSh 13.1 billion (PHC-F) and KSh 8 billion (ECCIF) in FY 2025/26, with SHIF registration reaching 25 million Kenyans by October 2025, marking a significant step toward financial protection."},{"p":72,"t":"273. Looking ahead to FY 2026/27-2028/29, the sector aims to deepen UHC implementation by strengthening  community  health,  expanding  health  financing  schemes,  increasing  health workforce, enhancing regulation, promoting local manufacturing, advancing digital health, and modernizing  laboratories  and  referral  systems.  Emphasis  will  also  be  placed  on  emergency preparedness, antimicrobial resistance containment, climate resilience, and governance."},{"p":72,"t":"274. Future  efforts  will  focus  on  resource  mobilization,  regulation  under  the  Social  Health Authority, local health product manufacturing, digital health  expansion,  and  improved coordination  of  disease  control  programs.  The  sector  is  committed  to  delivering  equitable, accessible, and quality healthcare for all Kenyans, with projected budgets of KSh 167.4 billion, KSh  197.4  billion,  and  KSh  203.1  billion  for  FY  2026/27,  FY  2027/28  and  FY  2028/29, respectively."},{"section":"Education Sector"},{"p":72,"t":"Education Sector"},{"p":72,"t":"275. The  Education  Sector  is  vital  for  human  capital  development,  providing  inclusive, equitable,  and  quality  education,  training,  and  research.  It  encompasses  Basic  Education, Technical and  Vocational  Education  and  Training  (TVET),  Higher  Education,  Science, Technology,  Innovation,  and  the  Teachers  Service  Commission,  guided  by  Kenya's  2010 Constitution, Vision 2030, the  Fourth  Medium  Term  Plan,  the  Bottom-Up  Economic Transformation Agenda, and the 2023-2027 National Education Sector Strategic Plan."},{"p":72,"t":"276. During the review period, the sector made significant progress in access, equity, quality, and  relevance,  driven  by  reforms  such  as  Competence-Based  Education  (CBE),  institutional modernization, and enhanced learner support systems."},{"section":"Basic Education"},{"p":72,"t":"Basic Education"},{"p":72,"t":"277. Improvements  in  enrolment  and  learning  conditions  were  notable.  Junior  Secondary enrolment tripled from 1.02 million in 2022/23 to 3.13 million in 2024/25, reflecting the CBC rollout. Secondary enrolment increased from 3.69 million to 4.04 million before stabilizing at 3.35 million after a transition period. Infrastructure development included 13,500 classrooms, 863 laboratories, and 1,896 sanitation facilities. Equity initiatives, such as the Elimu Scholarship Programme  and  School Meals Programme, supported thousands of learners annually. Assessment stability was maintained with over 1.24 million KPSEA candidates, and support for learners with special needs was enhanced through assistive devices and targeted interventions."},{"section":"Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET)"},{"p":72,"t":"Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET)"},{"p":72,"t":"278. TVET experienced expansion and quality improvements. Enrolments grew from 562,499 to 708,885, with accredited institutions increasing from 2,401 to 2,969. The implementation of Competency-Based Education (CBE) advanced ,  with  assessed  and  certified  candidates  rising from 16,083 to 214,275. Trainer capacity was strengthened through recruitment and professional development, with a 260 percent increase in training participation. Infrastructure development included 36 completed projects and 108 ongoing ones, supported by scholarships benefiting over 110,000 students."},{"section":"Higher Education and Research"},{"p":73,"t":"Higher Education and Research"},{"p":73,"t":"279. Access, financing, and innovation output improved. University enrollment increased from 638,479 to 680,768 in 2023/24, then decreased to 547,092 in 2024/25 following funding reforms. Student  financing  expanded,  with  loan  beneficiaries  rising  significantly  with  university  loan beneficiaries increasing from 228,453 to 415,335 and TVET loan beneficiaries from 122,321 to 277,774. The Open University of Kenya enrolled 5,063 students in 30 digital programs. Research and  innovation  activities  included  52  incubated  innovations,  430  trained  innovators,  and  78 outstanding innovators. Major development projects were completed, with ongoing initiatives supporting research and innovation ecosystems."},{"section":"Teachers Service Commission (TSC)"},{"p":73,"t":"Teachers Service Commission (TSC)"},{"p":73,"t":"280. The TSC enhanced teacher recruitment, capacity, and welfare. Promotions reached 126,462 teachers,  and  recruitment  continued  through  various  programs.  Teacher  retooling  on  CBE involved 220,097 educators. Digitization of 403,476 teacher files improved records management, and infrastructure was expanded with new county offices in Kilifi and Machakos."},{"section":"Science, Research, and Innovation"},{"p":73,"t":"Science, Research, and Innovation"},{"p":73,"t":"281. Research activities increased, with licensed studies rising from 8,187 to 12,339 and over 242  projects  funded.  Innovation  support  included  incubating  8 -12  innovations  annually, contributing to science and technology solutions aligned with national priorities."},{"section":"Future Priorities (FY 2026/27 -2028/29)"},{"p":73,"t":"Future Priorities (FY 2026/27 -2028/29)"},{"p":73,"t":"282. The sector aims to fully operationalize CBC/CBE up to Senior School, expand secondary infrastructure, strengthen teacher management, and scale digital learning. Efforts will focus on improving access to affordable TVET and university education, enhancing STEM and research ecosystems, promoting equity, and implementing data-driven governance through KEMIS and PPP engagement."},{"p":73,"t":"283. Funding allocations for the sector are projected at KSh 767.3 billion, KSh 816.3 billion, and KSh 869.4 billion for the FY 2026/27, FY 2027/28 and FY 2028/29, respectively."},{"section":"Governance, Justice, Law and Order Sector"},{"p":73,"t":"Governance, Justice, Law and Order Sector"},{"p":73,"t":"284. The Governance, Justice, Law, and Order Sector (GJLO) align with the UN-Classification of  the  Functions  of  Government  (COFOG)  to  guide  budgeting  and  ensure  efficient  fiscal planning. It includes 17 sub-sectors, 14 semi-autonomous Government Agencies (SAGAs), and various tribunals, all dedicated to upholding the rule of law, protecting human rights, ensuring access to justice, maintaining security, and promoting ethical governance."},{"p":73,"t":"285. During the review period, the sector made significant progress in fulfilling its mandate. Most  sub-sectors met their performance targets, demonstrating improved  coordination, efficiency,  and  accountability.  Notable  achievements  include  managing  413,556  inmates  in court-exceeding  the  target  of  360,000-thus  facilitating  timely  trials  and  better  access  to justice. The sector also operationalized 47 County and 290 Sub-County Disaster Management Committees, enhancing emergency response by over 60 percent compared to the previous period. Police patrols and intelligence operations contributed to a decline in national crime rates, with all officers receiving medical insurance coverage. Additionally, the digitization of over 5,000 government services on the e-Citizen platform reduced service turnaround times by 70 percent."},{"p":73,"t":"286. Passport processing was streamlined, clearing a backlog of over 200,000 applications and reducing processing time from 21 to 7 days, resulting in the issuance of 514,152 passports. The sector conducted 128,010 training sessions on value-based education and presented 389 cases"},{"p":74,"t":"for offence determination, recovering assets worth KSh 3.4 billion. The Assets Recovery Agency managed suspected proceeds  of  crime  totalling  KSh  9.36  billion,  which  are  currently  under investigation. The Public Prosecution maintained a conviction rate of 93.12 percent, improved case management through the Judiciary's e-filing system, and advanced alternatives to trials."},{"p":74,"t":"287. Looking  ahead,  the  sector  aims  to  strengthen  community  policing,  promote  restorative justice, and improve correctional services through rehabilitation, vocational training, psychosocial  support,  and  community  initiatives.  Infrastructure  development,  administrative gazettement, forensic training, and police welfare reforms-such as enhanced medical coverage, housing, and professional training-will be prioritized. The sector also plans to expand digital services via the e-Citizen platform, review legislation to strengthen the rule of law, and enhance transparency and data-driven decision-making."},{"p":74,"t":"288. The sector budget is projected at KSh 329.9 billion for FY 2026/27, increasing to KSh 339.3 billion in FY 2027/28, and KSh 344.9 billion in FY 2028/29."},{"section":"Public Administration and International Relations Sector"},{"p":74,"t":"Public Administration and International Relations Sector"},{"p":74,"t":"289. The Public Administration and International Relations (PAIR) Sector play a vital role in coordinating  government  functions,  including  planning,  administration,  public  finance,  and legislative activities, while also fostering Kenya's international relations."},{"p":74,"t":"290. Between  FY  2022/23  and  2024/25,  the  sector  implemented  programs  aligned  with  the Bottom-Up Economic Transformation Agenda (BETA), Kenya Vision 2030, Fourth MediumTerm Plan (2023-2027), and other national priorities. Notable achievements include strengthening government coordination, enhancing performance management, and promoting transparency and accountability. These efforts led to improved macroeconomic management, fiscal discipline, and effective coordination of legislative and cabinet decisions. The sector also advanced intergovernmental relations, devolution support, and improved delivery of foreign and diaspora services through economic diplomacy and citizen protection. Additionally, it promoted public service transformation, capacity building, monitoring and evaluation, citizen engagement, ethics,  and  good  governance,  contributing  to  better  service  delivery,  job  creation,  and  socioeconomic development."},{"p":74,"t":"291. For  FY  2026/27  to  2028/29,  the  sector  plans  to  implement  46  programs  and  136  subprograms  aligned  with  the  Bottom-Up  Economic Transformation Agenda  and  Kenya Vision 2030. The budget allocations are KSh 367.5 billion, KSh 385.3 billion, and KSh 416.4 billion for each fiscal year, respectively, focusing on improving service delivery, financial management, resource mobilization, and monitoring and evaluation."},{"p":74,"t":"292. For  FY  2026/27  to  2028/29,  the  sector  plans  to  implement  46  programs  and  136  subprograms  aligned  with  the  Bottom-Up  Economic Transformation Agenda  and  Kenya Vision 2030, focusing on improving service delivery, financial management, resource mobilization, and monitoring and evaluation. The budget is projected at KSh 354.9 billion, KSh 385.3 billion, and KSh 416.4 billion for the FY 2026/27, FY 2027/28, and FY 2028/29, respectively."},{"section":"National Security Sector"},{"p":74,"t":"National Security Sector"},{"p":74,"t":"293. The National Security Sector is vital for fostering socio-economic and political development,  supporting  Kenya  Vision  2030  and  the  Bottom-up  Economic  Transformation Agenda  (BETA).  It  addresses  emerging  threats  such  as  terrorism,  radicalization,  trafficking, money laundering, cyber-crime, and other challenges that threaten peace and progress."},{"p":74,"t":"294. To implement key programs and counter these threats, the sector's budget is projected at KSh 299.9 billion for FY 2026/27, KSh 295.3 billion for FY 2027/28, and KSh 312.5 billion for FY 2028/29."},{"section":"Social Protection, Culture and Recreation Sector"},{"p":75,"t":"Social Protection, Culture and Recreation Sector"},{"p":75,"t":"295. The Social Protection Sector is vital for Kenya's socio-economic development, aligning with Vision 2023, MTP IV, and the Bottom-Up Economic Transformation Agenda. It promotes sustainable  employment,  labour  practices,  talent  development,  gender  equality,  community empowerment, and cultural preservation."},{"p":75,"t":"296. Between 2022/23 and 2024/25, the sector advanced sports and creative industries through infrastructure upgrades for events like CHAN 2024 and AFCON 2027. Kenyan athletes earned 131  medals  globally,  and  the  country  hosted  35  international  events,  establishing  itself  as  a sporting  hub.  Heritage  sites  were  restored,  cultural  diplomacy  strengthened  via  international exchanges, and over 2.4 million public records digitized. The creative sector supported 2,720 women in beadwork, 1,600 performing artists, and 7,393 emerging musicians, providing income opportunities. Additionally, 815 youths received training in music and dance."},{"p":75,"t":"297. Youth  empowerment  was  prioritized,  with  1.17  million  youths  accessing  services, leadership training, and skills development. The sector issued business loans to 28,003 youths and facilitated employment abroad for 3,537 individuals. In skills development, 251,077 people received  industrial  training,  and  bilateral  agreements  with  Germany  and  Austria  enhanced workforce  mobility.  Social  protection  programs  reached  over  a  million  vulnerable  persons through cash transfers and supported persons with disabilities, orphans, students, and women entrepreneurs with KSh 3.12 billion to promote gender equality and economic empowerment."},{"p":75,"t":"298. Future  priorities  include  modernizing  museums,  protecting  nine  cultural  heritage  sites, hosting  festivals,  establishing  music  studios,  and  nurturing  over  1,800  musicians.  Youth programs will train 90,000 in life and technical skills, mentor 43,000 in entrepreneurship, and provide ICT, counselling, and career services to 580,000 youths. In employment, the sector aims to place 570,000 job seekers locally and abroad, sign 12 bilateral agreements, certify 310,000 workers, and conduct workplace inspections. Social protection will expand cash transfers to over 1.2  million  vulnerable  individuals,  support  community  groups,  persons  with  disabilities,  and enhance  child  protection,  gender  equality,  and  women's  economic  empowerment  through bursaries, sanitary products, GBV prevention, and financial aid. In addition, the Government will strengthen  child  protection  services,  the  Government  through  provision  of  cash  transfers  for orphans and vulnerable children, issuance of secondary school bursary, sensitization of parents and caregivers on prevention of violence against children and harmful practices, training children on online safety, training parents on positive parenting, distribution of dignity kits to emergency hit children, reintegration of children to family/community care who are at Statutory Children Institutions, sensitization of stakeholders on children adoption services, and establishment of an Integrated National Children Database."},{"p":75,"t":"299. The sector's budget allocation is projected at KSh 87.2 billion for FY 2026/27, KSh 83.4 billion for FY 2027/28, and KSh 90.4 billion for FY 2028/29."},{"section":"Environment Protection, Water and Natural Resources Sector"},{"p":75,"t":"Environment Protection, Water and Natural Resources Sector"},{"p":75,"t":"300. The Environment Protection, Water, and Natural Resources (EPWNR) Sector is vital to Kenya's  socio-economic  development,  focusing  on  food  security,  climate  resilience,  water security, biodiversity, mineral development, and sustainable resource management. During FY 2022/23-2024/25,  the  sector  implemented  numerous  initiatives  supported  by  an  improved budget absorption rate rising from 78 percent to 95 percent, achieving progress in irrigation, water and sanitation, mining regulation, wildlife conservation, environmental protection, climate change response, and forestry."},{"p":75,"t":"301. In agriculture, the sector expanded irrigated land by 108,210 acres, boosting community and  smallholder  productivity.  Water  storage  increased  by  42  million  cubic  meters,  enabling"},{"p":76,"t":"irrigation of 28,000 acres. Paddy rice production reached 320,000 tons, valued at KSh 64 billion. The Galana Kulalu Food Security Project was 99 percent complete, and 880 hectares of degraded land were rehabilitated. Additionally, 20 schools were equipped with micro-irrigation systems, boreholes, and greenhouses to support horticulture and seedling production."},{"p":76,"t":"302. Water and sanitation efforts improved urban and rural access, with key projects like the Karimenu II bulk water system and the Northern Collector Tunnel operationalized, supplying Nairobi  and  surrounding  areas.  Twenty-three  towns  and  120  schools  gained  new  water connections, and major dams such as Thwake and Yamo Dam advanced in construction. Over 135 small dams and pans provided more than 2.7 million cubic meters of storage. Sewer services expanded to 13 towns, and 150 low-cost sanitation facilities were built. River monitoring and pollution hotspot mapping enhanced environmental compliance."},{"p":76,"t":"303. The mining sector issued 7,783 mineral export permits, 6,427 explosives licenses, and 472 fireworks  permits.  Inspections  covered  exploration  sites,  mining  operations,  and  explosives handling, with geological surveys conducted for various minerals. Support for artisanal miners included  training  8,725  individuals  and  formalizing  255  cooperatives  to  promote  safety  and environmental standards."},{"p":76,"t":"304. Wildlife conservation saw disbursement of KSh 2.818 billion for human-wildlife conflict compensation, a 54 percent reduction in poaching, and habitat restoration of 7,839 hectares. The Kenya Wildlife Service trained 1,350 rangers and 150 cadets, enhancing protection efforts. Park visitation  reached  8.96  million,  generating  KSh  21.1  billion,  supported  by  digitized  revenue systems. Wildlife stress mitigation included constructing water pans and boreholes, alongside maintaining park infrastructure."},{"p":76,"t":"305. The environment and climate change subsector advanced Kenya's green transition through circular economy initiatives, ecosystem rehabilitation, and climate resilience strengthening. It established  e-waste  centers,  waste  management  hubs,  and  licensed  nearly  250,000  waste transporters. Rehabilitated land and water catchments covered thousands of hectares, wetlands were restored, and meteorological capacity was enhanced with 120 weather stations. The country submitted its updated NDC to the UNFCCC, unlocking climate finance opportunities, while meteorological services supported early warning and adaptation strategies."},{"p":76,"t":"306. Forestry efforts contributed significantly to the 15-Billion Tree Programme, with over 1 billion  trees  grown,  high-quality  seeds  produced,  and  260  million  seedlings  raised.  Forest conservation protected 2.6 million hectares of gazetted forests, and plantations, bamboo forests, and seed facilities expanded to promote sustainable management."},{"p":76,"t":"307. Looking ahead to FY 2026/27-2028/29, the sector aims to scale irrigation by 300,000 acres, increase water storage by 1 billion cubic meters, and improve access to clean water from 74 percent to 80 percent. Sanitation access will be raised from 40.9 percent to 65 percent, with efforts to eliminate open defecation and extend water supply to 2.1 million more people. Major projects  like  WSDP,  Mwache  Dam,  and  others  will  be  completed.  Mining  priorities  include completing  the  Geo-Data  Bank,  mapping  new  deposits,  and  enhancing  regulation.  Wildlife initiatives will focus on habitat restoration, fencing, and disbursement of KSh 5.95 billion in compensation. Environmental efforts will involve wetland restoration, plastic ban enforcement, meteorological upgrades, and GHG reduction. Forestry targets include planting 15 billion trees, producing 2.2 billion seedlings, and rehabilitating over 330,000 hectares of forests."},{"p":76,"t":"308. The sector's budget allocation is projected at KSh 106.7 billion, KSh 122.7 billion, and KSh 163.1 billion for the FY 2026/27, FY 2027/28 and FY 2028/29, respectively."},{"section":"3.5 Public Participation/ Sector Hearings and Involvement of Stakeholders"},{"p":77,"t":"3.5 Public Participation/ Sector Hearings and Involvement of Stakeholders"},{"p":77,"t":"309. Public participation and involvement of stakeholders in the medium-term budget process is a Constitutional requirement. In fulfilment of this legal requirement, while preparing the 2026 Budget Policy Statement (BPS), the resolutions adopted by Parliament on the previous Budget Policy  Statements  were  taken  into  account. Annex Table 5 explains  how  the  resolutions  by Parliament on the 2025 BPS and 2024 BPS have been taken into account in the 2026 BPS and the reasons thereof."},{"p":77,"t":"310. The Public Finance Management (PFM) Act, CAP 412A requires that the input of the public be taken into account before the budget proposals are firmed up. In compliance, Public Sector Hearings  were  conducted  from  19 th to  21 st November  2025  at  the  Kenyatta  International Convention Centre providing a platform for members of the public to give input into the country's budget and sector plans. Annex Table 6 provides a summary of the comments received and the actions taken and or response given during the Public Sector Hearings."},{"p":77,"t":"311. Further,  the  draft  2026  BPS  was  uploaded  onto  the  National  Treasury  website  on  19 th December 2025 inviting the public and stakeholders to share comments. As required by the PFM Act, CAP 412A, the document was further shared with the various stakeholders including:"},{"p":77,"t":"Institutions  listed  in  the  PFM  Act,  2012  which  include:  the  Commission  on  Revenue Allocation; County Governments; Controller of Budget; Parliamentary Service Commission and the Judicial Service Commission;"},{"p":77,"t":"ii) Institutions that constitute the Macro Working Group which include: the National Treasury; State  Department  for  Economic  Planning;  Central  Bank  of  Kenya;  Kenya  Revenue Authority; Kenya National Bureau of Statistics; Kenya Institute of Public Policy Research and Analysis; and Commission on Revenue Allocation;"},{"p":77,"t":"iii) Cabinet Secretaries and Principal Secretaries of all Government Ministries and the Office of the Attorney General; and"},{"p":77,"t":"iv) Office of the Council of Economic Advisors at the Executive office of the President."},{"p":77,"t":"312. The comments were considered in finalizing this document. A summary of the comments received from the various stakeholders and the public and the actions taken are summarized in Annex Table 7."},{"section":"IV. COUNTY FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND DIVISION OF REVENUE"},{"p":78,"t":"IV. COUNTY FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND DIVISION OF REVENUE"},{"section":"4.1 County Governments ' Compliance with Fiscal Responsibility Principle s"},{"p":78,"t":"4.1 County Governments ' Compliance with Fiscal Responsibility Principle s"},{"p":78,"t":"313. The following Fiscal Responsibility Principles (FRPs) need to be adhered to in line with the relevant legal provisions:"},{"p":78,"t":"Development budget: In accordance with the PFM Act CAP 412A Section 107 (2) (b), over the medium term, a minimum of thirty percent of the County Governments' budgets shall be allocated to development expenditure. Therefore, it is essential to ensure adherence to this fiscal responsibility principle both at the budget approval stage and during the actual implementation of the budget."},{"p":78,"t":"ii) Wages: Regulation 25(1) (a) and (b) of the PFM (County Governments) Regulations 2015 provides that County Governments' expenditure on wages and benefits for public officers shall not exceed thirtyfive percent (35 percent) of the County Government's total revenue. Compliance with this fiscal rule has been wanting, highlighting the necessity for a concerted effort to ensure that the wage bill remains within the legally established threshold."},{"p":78,"t":"iii) Borrowing: Regulation 25 (1) (d) of the PFM (County Governments) Regulations 2015 provides that the county public debt shall not exceed twenty percent (20 percent) of the total  revenue  of  the  County  Government  at  any  given  time.  Any  County  Government seeking to borrow must comply with this legal requirement."},{"p":78,"t":"iv) Taxes: In accordance with provisions of Section 15 (2) (e) of the PFM Act CAP 412A, County Governments should uphold a reasonable degree of predictability regarding tax rates  and  tax  bases,  considering  any  potential  future  tax  reforms  while  implementing legislation  for  the  collection  of  own-source  revenue.  Prioritizing  the  establishment  of adequate legal frameworks regarding the principal legislation governing the imposition of taxes and fees is essential to ensure that these actions are conducted in accordance with the law."},{"p":78,"t":"Fiscal  risk:  County  Governments  are  required  to  manage  fiscal  risks  prudently  in accordance with Section 15 (2) (e) of the PFM Act CAP 412A."},{"section":"4.1.1 County Governments Overall Expenditure for FY 2024/25"},{"p":78,"t":"4.1.1 County Governments Overall Expenditure for FY 2024/25"},{"p":78,"t":"314. Table 4.1 below provides a summary of the total expenditures, total revenues, and overall absorption rates for the FY 2024/25."},{"p":79,"t":"Table 4.1: County Governments Overall Expenditure for FY 2024/25"},{"p":79,"t":"Source of Data: Controller of Budget"},{"p":79,"t":"315. The actual estimated total expenditures for County Governments amounted to KSh 470.7 billion for the FY 2024/25. This figure includes both recurrent and development expenditures, while  the  actual  total  revenue  amounted  to  KSh  533.1  billion.  Budgeted  development expenditure represented 36.4 percent of budgeted total expenditure, while budgeted recurrent expenditure accounted for 63.6 percent of the total budget. Additionally, expenditure on wages was 41.4 percent of total revenue, a decrease from 47.6 percent in the previous financial year."},{"p":79,"t":"Table  4.1 above  shows  County  Governments '  adherence  to  the  Fiscal  Responsibility principles mentioned above. A deeper analysis is provided below:"},{"p":79,"t":"Development Expenditure: The counties' allocation was 36.4 percent of the total budget falling  within  the  requirement.  However,  the  26.3  percent  rate  of  actual  development expenditure to total budget falls short of this requirement, indicating an underspending on projects that promote long-term growth and infrastructure development."},{"p":79,"t":"ii) Recurrent Expenditure: Counties are encouraged to limit recurrent expenditures to free up resources for development. With 73.7 percent of the budget spent on recurrent expenses, counties are heavily reliant on these funds, suggesting a need to reduce recurrent costs in favour of development priorities."},{"p":79,"t":"iii) Wages  and  Salaries:  PFMA  CAP  412A  emphasizes  limiting  spending  on  personnel emoluments to a sustainable level to ensure fiscal stability. As highlighted above, counties' expenditure on wages was 41.4 percent of total revenue. This level is close to the ceiling but still above 35 percent, signaling a high wage burden that may limit spending flexibility."},{"p":79,"t":"These figures suggest the need for counties to re-evaluate spending priorities, emphasizing the reduction of recurrent and wage expenses and reallocating funds towards development to meet the PFMA guidelines."},{"section":"4.1.2 Recurrent Expenditure as a Percentage of Total Revenue"},{"p":79,"t":"4.1.2 Recurrent Expenditure as a Percentage of Total Revenue"},{"p":79,"t":"318. County Governments are required under Section 107(2) of the PFM Act CAP 412A, to ensure that recurrent expenditure does not exceed their total revenue. In FY 2024/25, all County Governments complied with this provision based on their budgeted recurrent expenditure. The performance by county is illustrated in Figure 4.1 ."},{"p":80,"t":"Figure 4.1: Recurrent Expenditure as a Percentage of Total Revenue for FY 2024/25"},{"p":80,"t":"Source of Data: Controller of Budget"},{"section":"4.1.3 Development Budget as a Percentage of the Total Budget"},{"p":80,"t":"4.1.3 Development Budget as a Percentage of the Total Budget"},{"p":80,"t":"319. Additionally, Section 107(2) (b) of the PFM Act CAP 412A, requires that at least thirty percent of a County Government's budget be allocated to development expenditure over the medium term.  As  shown  in  Table  1,  the  total  approved  development  budget  for  all  County Governments  in  FY  2024/25  accounted  for  36.4  percent  of  the  total  budget.  Most  counties complied with this requirement, with only three falling short, as illustrated in Figure 4.2 ."},{"p":80,"t":"Figure 4.2: Budgeted Development Expenditure as a Percentage of Total County Budget for FY 2024/25"},{"p":80,"t":"Source of Data: Controller of Budget"},{"p":80,"t":"320. Despite most County Governments meeting the legal requirement for allocating at least thirty percent of their budgets to development, actual development expenditure in FY 2024/25 accounted for only 26.3 percent of total actual expenditure, as shown in Table 4.1 . During the same period, only 18 counties met the PFM Act CAP 412A, 2012 threshold based on actual spending relative to their total budgets. Details of individual county expenditures are presented in Figure 4.3."},{"p":81,"t":"Figure 4.3: Actual Development Expenditures as a Percentage of Actual Total Expenditure for FY 2024/25"},{"p":81,"t":"Source of Data: Controller of Budget"},{"p":81,"t":"321. The decline in development expenditure from 36.4 percent in budget allocation to 26.3 percent in actual spending indicates that, although counties are allocating a significant share of their  budgets  to  development,  actual  implementation  remains  low.  This  trend  suggests  that development outcomes may be constrained by higher spending on recurrent expenditures, as well as  challenges  in  executing  development  plans,  including  delays  in  project  procurement  and implementation."},{"section":"4.1.4 Expenditure on Wage Bill as a Percentage of Total Revenue"},{"p":81,"t":"4.1.4 Expenditure on Wage Bill as a Percentage of Total Revenue"},{"p":81,"t":"322. Regulation  25(1)(a)  and  (b)  of  the  Public  Finance  Management  (County  Governments) Regulations, 2015, stipulates that County Governments' expenditure on wages and benefits for public officers should not exceed 35 percent of their total revenue. In FY 2024/25, counties spent KSh 220.64 billion on wages, representing 41.4 percent  of the total  revenue  of  KSh  533.11 billion. This exceeds the prescribed threshold under the PFM Act CAP 412A, 2012. As illustrated in Figure 4.4 , most counties allocated a higher proportion of their revenue to wages above the recommended threshold, with only nine counties namely: Kilifi, Tana River, Siaya, Nakuru, Kwale, Nandi, Nyandarua, Narok, and Migori remaining within the legal limit."},{"p":81,"t":"Figure  4.4:  County  Governments '  Actual  Expenditures  on  Wages  and  Benefits  as  a Percentage of Total Actual Revenue for FY 2024/25"},{"p":81,"t":"Source of Data: Controller of Budget"},{"section":"4.2 Performance of County Governments Own Source Revenue"},{"p":82,"t":"4.2 Performance of County Governments Own Source Revenue"},{"section":"4.2.1 Performance of Own Source Revenue Against Target"},{"p":82,"t":"4.2.1 Performance of Own Source Revenue Against Target"},{"p":82,"t":"323. In  FY  2024/25,  County  Governments  collectively  generated  KSh  67.3  billion  in  Own Source Revenue (OSR) against an annual target of KSh 87.7 billion, representing a performance rate of 76.8 percent. A summary of individual county performance is presented in Table 4.2 ."},{"p":82,"t":"Table 4.2: Total County Government OSR Collection for FY 2024/25 (Including A-i-A)"},{"p":82,"t":"Source of Data: Controller of Budget"},{"p":83,"t":"324. Total  OSR included the Facility  Improvement Fund, which is the money collected and retained by health facilities in line with the Facilities Improvement Financing Act, 2023. As at the 30 th June 2024, the public health facilities had collected and retained a total of KSh 24.5 billion against a target of KSh 20.7 billion overshooting the target by 18 percent. For ordinary revenue performance, counties were able to generate KSh 42.7 billion against a target of KSh 66.9 billion which represents an average of 64 percent of the targeted OSR."},{"p":83,"t":"325. A total of twelve counties managed to collect more than one hundred percent of their annual OSR target. These counties are; Kisii, Tana River, Mandera, Wajir, Kirinyaga, Garissa, Vihiga, Samburu,  Meru,  Elegeyo-Marakwet,  Homabay,  and  Turkana.  Conversely,  four  County Governments collected  less  than  60  percent  of  their  OSR  target.  These  counties  are:  Isiolo, Machakos, Kajiado and Siaya. The summary of individual county performance is presented in Figure 4.5 ."},{"p":83,"t":"Figure  4.5:  Actual  Revenue  Collected  by  the  County  Governments  as  a  percentage  of Annual Revenue Target for FY 2024/25"},{"p":83,"t":"Source of Data: Controller of Budget"},{"section":"4.2.2 OSR Growth in FY 2024/25"},{"p":83,"t":"4.2.2 OSR Growth in FY 2024/25"},{"p":83,"t":"326. An assessment  of  the  OSR  performance  for  FY  2023/2024  -2024/2025  reveals  that  20 Counties recorded more than 50 percent growth in revenue collection. This could be attributed to  the  implementation  of  the  OSR  policy,  continuous  capacity  building  on  public  finance management, revenue automation and revenue administration reforms such as implementation of  the  FIF.  Nonetheless,  there  is  a  need  to  explore  the  reasons  for  negative  OSR  growth  in Kakamega County that recorded a decline in OSR collection in FY 2024/25 by 15.2 percent. The details of performance for the 47 County Governments are summarised in Table 4.3 ."},{"p":84,"t":"Table 4.3: County Governments OSR Growth between FY 2023/24 and FY 2024/25"},{"p":84,"t":"Source of Data: Controller of Budget"},{"section":"4.2.3 National Government Support on enhancement of County Government OSR"},{"p":84,"t":"4.2.3 National Government Support on enhancement of County Government OSR"},{"p":84,"t":"327. The County Governments Own Source Revenue (OSR) enhancement efforts are guided by the  National  Policy  to  Support  Enhancement  of  County  Governments  Own  Source  Revenue which was approved by Cabinet in 2018 to be implemented in ten years. The goal of the policy is to propose a standardized institutional, policy and legal framework for own source revenue raising measures and enforcement that would be applicable to all County Governments."},{"p":85,"t":"328. Some the notable achievements of the Policy so far include:  enactment of the National Rating Act 2024 which was spearheaded by the National Treasury in collaboration with the State Department for Lands; development of a model Tariffs and Pricing Policy by the Commission on Revenue Allocation in conjunction with the National Treasury; development of the County Governments (Revenue Raising Process) Bill  by the National Treasury and other stakeholders, which is awaiting consideration by the Parliament; and, development of a framework outlining processes and procedures for payment of Contribution in Lieu of Rates (CILOR) provided for the National Rating Act."},{"p":85,"t":"329. Currently, the National Treasury is finalizing the review of the Policy. Engagement with the County Governments will be undertaken to take stock of the progress made so far in the implementation of the Policy as well as identify challenges and opportunities that will inform the  next  phase  of  implementing  the  Policy.  Some  of  the  pending  activities  that  the  National Treasury is committed in finalizing include: holding the County OSR Conference; developing the National Rating Act Regulations in order to operationalize the Act and the CILOR payment framework;  finalization  of  the  proposed  Integrated  County  Revenue  Management  System (ICRMS);  and,  the  finalization  of  the  revenue  forecasting  model  to  be  used  by  the  County Governments to provide an objective criterion to set revenue targets."},{"p":85,"t":"330. Additionally, the OSR policy also recommended development of a National Framework Legislation to regulate the introduction of taxes, fees and charges by the County Governments. Consequently, the National Treasury and other stakeholders developed the County Governments (Revenue Raising Process) Bill. This Bill is aimed at ensuring compliance with Article 209 (5) of the Constitution as well as ensuring consistency and predictability in county revenue practices. The  Cabinet  on  28 th February  2023  approved  the  County  Governments  (Revenue  Raising Process) Bill, 2023. The Bill has since been resubmitted to Parliament for consideration. The Bill is currently in the Second Reading stage at Senate. It is anticipated that once this Bill is enacted, the complaints from the traders and truck drivers within the region will be mitigated, Intergovernmental Relations Technical Committee (IGRTC) have already formed a multiagency team inclusive of the National Treasury to address the grievances. The recommendations from this team will be submitted to Summit for further directions."},{"section":"4.3 County Government Pending Bills"},{"p":85,"t":"4.3 County Government Pending Bills"},{"p":85,"t":"331. Section 94 (1) (a) of the PFM Act CAP 412A, stipulates, inter alia, that failure to make any payments as and when due by a State Organ or a Public Entity is an indicator of a serious material breach or a persistent material breach of measures established under the Act. Article 225 of the Constitution read together with Section 96 of the PFMA CAP 412A gives the Cabinet Secretary responsible for Finance powers to stop the transfer of funds to the concerned State Organ."},{"p":85,"t":"332. As of 30 th June 2025, County Governments reported outstanding pending bills amounting to KSh 183.0 billion. This comprises KSh 130.8 billion for recurrent activities and KSh 52.2 billion  for  development  activities. The total pending bills for the County Executive are  KSh 177.9 billion, while those for the Assemblies amount to KSh 5.1 billion. Nairobi City County has the highest pending bills, totalling KSh 86.8 billion, representing 47 percent of the total stock of pending bills. On average, the total pending bills by County Governments accounted for 30 percent of the total county government approved budgets in FY 2024/25."},{"p":85,"t":"333. An analysis of the aged pending bills for County Governments as of 30 th June 2025 shows that KSh 48.9 billion (27 percent) are under one year, KSh 19.8 billion (11 percent), are aged between one and two years, KSh 20.34 billion (11 percent), are aged between two and three years, and KSh 85.4 billion (45 percent), are older than three years. This analysis excludes aged pending  bills  for  Kakamega  and  Narok  Counties. Table  4.4 ,  presents  county  government pending bills as at 30 th June 2025."},{"p":86,"t":"Table 4.4: County Governments Pending Bills as of 30 th  June 2025 (In KSh Million)"},{"p":88,"t":"334. The growing stock of pending bills in County Governments poses a fiscal discipline and sustainability risk. The National Treasury has started transitioning from cash basis to accrual accounting, which is expected to improve the recording of pending bills in financial statements and facilitate gradual payment. Through the Second Kenya Devolution Support Programme II (KDSP II), County Governments have been supported in developing Pending Bills Action plans for  repaying  pending  bills  and  ensuring  compliance  with  Regulation  55  (2)  b  of  the  Public Finance Management (County Governments) Regulations, 2015."},{"p":88,"t":"335. During its 27 th Ordinary Session held on 23 rd June 2025, the Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council (IBEC) approved and adopted the County Governments' Pending Bills Action Plan,  as  submitted  by  the  Controller  of  Budget.  The  Council  further  directed  all  County Governments to customise and implement their respective Pending Bills Action Plans, aiming to progressively reduce the stock of pending bills and keep them at minimal levels."},{"section":"Status of Pension Funds Unremitted Deductions by County Governments"},{"p":88,"t":"Status of Pension Funds Unremitted Deductions by County Governments"},{"p":88,"t":"336. The Taskforce on the Non-Remittance of Pension Contributions and Statutory Deductions by  County  Government  Entities  was  established  following  Senate  resolutions  to  address persistent  non-remittance  of  pension  contributions  and  other  statutory  deductions  by  county governments, which posed risks to retirement security and fiscal discipline."},{"p":88,"t":"337. The  Taskforce  was  mandated  to  assess  the  extent  and  causes  of  non-remittance  and recommend administrative, operational, and policy measures to ensure that pension contributions and statutory deductions are remitted concurrently with payroll processing. The Taskforce has since submitted its report to the Senate. In response, the Government is implementing the Human Resource  Information  System -Kenya  (HRIS-Ke),  which  is  designed  to  automate  payroll processing and facilitate the simultaneous computation and remittance of pension contributions and other statutory deductions. The system is being integrated with IFMIS and approved budget controls, thereby strengthening enforcement, reducing manual interventions, and minimising the risk of non-remittance."},{"section":"4.4 Equalisation Fund"},{"p":88,"t":"4.4 Equalisation Fund"},{"p":88,"t":"338. Article 204 of the Constitution establishes the Equalisation Fund, which requires that half a per cent (0.5 percent) of all revenue collected by the National Government each year, calculated based on the most recent audited revenue received and approved by the National Assembly, be paid  into  the  Fund.  According  to  Article  204(2),  the  National  Government  shall  use  the Equalisation Fund to provide marginalised areas with basic services, including water, roads, health facilities, and electricity."},{"p":88,"t":"339. The  Equalization  Fund  Appropriation  Act  2023  allocated  KSh  10,330,317,433  as conditional grants to the thirty-four (34) eligible counties identified as marginalised under the Second Marginalisation Policy. By the end of the FY 2024/25, the Equalization Fund Advisory Board had received and reviewed 1,593 project proposals from these 34 beneficiary counties. Of these  proposals,  the  Board  approved  1,556  projects  amounting  to  KSh  9,759,733,778,  as summarised  in Table  4.5 .  The  National  Treasury  has  allocated  KSh  9.6  billion  to  the Equalization Fund for the FY 2025/26, representing 0.5 percent of the national revenue based on the FY 2021/22 audited and approved revenues."},{"p":89,"t":"Table  4.5: Approved  Projects  for  Implementation  by  Counties  as  Appropriated  in Equalisation Fund Appropriation Act 2023"},{"p":89,"t":"Source: Equalization Fund Advisory Board (EFAB)"},{"section":"4.5 Division of Revenue for the FY 2026/27"},{"p":89,"t":"4.5 Division of Revenue for the FY 2026/27"},{"section":"4.5.1 Performance of Shareable Revenue"},{"p":89,"t":"4.5.1 Performance of Shareable Revenue"},{"p":89,"t":"340. Ordinary  revenue  is  projected  to  grow  to  KSh  2,901.9  billion  in  FY  2026/27  from  an approved budget of KSh 2,754.7 billion in FY 2025/26. Ordinary revenue collected over the past ten years has been below target except for FY 2021/22 when the target was surpassed as indicated in Figure 4.5 ."},{"p":90,"t":"Figure 4.5: Estimates of Ordinary Revenue vs. Actual Revenue (KSh trillion)"},{"p":90,"t":"Source of Data: The National Treasury"},{"section":"4.5.2 Division of Revenue for FY 2026/27"},{"p":90,"t":"4.5.2 Division of Revenue for FY 2026/27"},{"section":"4.5.2.1 Application of Article 203 (1) of the Constitution in Division of Revenue"},{"p":90,"t":"4.5.2.1 Application of Article 203 (1) of the Constitution in Division of Revenue"},{"p":90,"t":"Article 218(2) of the Constitution requires division of revenue between the two levels of Government and across County Governments to take into account the criteria set out in Article 203 (1) of the Constitution. The criteria include factors such as: national interest, public debt, other national obligations and needs of the disadvantaged groups and areas, among others."},{"p":90,"t":"As  indicated  in Table  4.6 ,  it  should  be  noted  that  after  considering  all  the  mandatory expenditures under Article 203(1) of the Constitution, the balance left for sharing between the two levels of Government is KSh 330.1 billion. Following the allocation of KSh 438.3 billion to County Governments for FY 2026/27 -comprising a proposed equitable share of KSh 420.0 billion and additional allocations of KSh 18.3 billion from the National Government's revenue -the  National  Government  faces  a  deficit  of  KSh  108.2  billion.  This  shortfall  impacts  the financing of key functions including education, health, defence, roads, and energy, among others. This will occasion additional borrowing which may distort the fiscal framework already set out in the 2026 Budget Policy Statement (BPS). Table 4.6 provides an assessment of the extent to which  the  requirements  of  Article  203  (1)  of  the  Constitution  have  been  incorporated  in estimating the division of revenue between the national and county levels of Government in the FY 2026/27."},{"p":90,"t":"On public debt servicing, the 2026 BPS has taken into account public debt related costs. These comprise the annual debt redemption cost as well as the interest payment for both domestic and external debt. The allocation for payment of public debt related costs is expected to increase from KSh 1,437.9 billion allocated in FY 2025/26 to KSh 1,542.1 billion allocated in the FY 2026/27, reflecting an increase of KSh 56.0 billion."},{"p":90,"t":"Pursuant to Article 203(1) (b) of the Constitution, the 2026 BPS has also taken into account the requirements for other national obligations, such as, mandatory pension contributions and/or payments, financing for constitutional offices, including Parliament  and  Judiciary as well as expenses relating to other statutory bodies. These are estimated to cost KSh 876.1 billion in FY 2026/27 up from KSh 811.3 billion allocated in the FY 2025/26."},{"p":91,"t":"Table 4.6: Summary of Considerations under Article 203 (1) of the Constitution"},{"p":91,"t":"Source of Data: The National Treasury"},{"p":91,"t":"345. Based on ordinary revenue projection of KSh 2,901.9 billion in FY 2026/27, it is proposed that  KSh  2,472.3  billion  be  allocated  to  National  Government,  KSh  420.0  billion  to  County Governments as equitable revenue share and  KSh 9.6 billion to  the Equalization  Fund.  The National Treasury proposes to allocate an additional KSh 5.6 billion in FY 2026/27 as partial payment to arrears for Equalization Fund. Table 4.7 shows the computation of the equitable share to County Governments for the FY 2019/20 to FY 2026/27."},{"p":91,"t":"Table 4.7: County Governments ' Equitable Revenue Share ( KSh Million)"},{"p":91,"t":"Source of Data: The National Treasury"},{"p":91,"t":"346. The allocation to County Governments' equitable revenue share of KSh 420.0 billion in FY 2026/27 is informed by the following circumstances: -"},{"p":91,"t":"Overall  revenue  shortfalls  against  targets  as  well  as  expenditures  pressures  during implementation of FY 2025/26. Specifically, ordinary revenues underperformed by KSh 115.3 billion as at end of December 2025. If this trend continues, it is bound to affect the projected ordinary revenue for FY 2026/27;"},{"p":91,"t":"ii) Over the years, the National Government has continued to solely bear shortfalls in revenue in any given financial year except for FY 2024/25;"},{"p":92,"t":"iii) The  macroeconomic  assumptions  outlined  in  2026  Budget  Policy  Statement  (BPS), including anticipated growth rates, inflation, and other economic performance indicators, which influence the resources available for allocation;"},{"p":92,"t":"iv) Declining ordinary revenue as a percent of GDP which indicates that revenue collection is not keeping pace with economic growth. Ordinary revenue as a share of GDP has declined from a high of 18.1 percent in FY 2013/14 to 14.1 percent in FY 2024/25 budget, and is projected at 14.4 percent in FY 2025/26;"},{"p":92,"t":"Consolidated Fund Services (CFS) is taking about 48.5 percent of ordinary revenue in the FY 2025/26, up from just 16.4 percent in 2013/14, pensions and interest payments tripling their share of revenues to 8.7 percent and 39.8 percent from FY 2013/14 to FY 2025/26. This trend is expected to remain the same in FY 2026/27;"},{"p":92,"t":"vi) The  spending  allocation  for  FY  2026/27  and  medium-term  budget  is  guided  by  the Government's  fiscal  consolidation  plan  intended  to  reduce  annual  uptake  of  debt  and thereby reduce debt vulnerabilities and improve debt sustainability. The implementation of the  fiscal  consolidation  plan  by  the  Government  is  aimed  at  reducing  the  fiscal  deficit inclusive of grants from 6.0 percent of GDP in FY 2024/25 and FY 2025/26, to 5.3 percent of the GDP in FY 2026/27. In this regard, there is need for continuous rationalization of expenditures by eliminating non-core expenditures while improving efficiency in development projects implementation to contain expenditure growth, and stabilize debt;"},{"p":92,"t":"vii) Increased expenditures for National Government for purposes of debt servicing; and"},{"p":92,"t":"viii) The proposed Equitable Share for financial year 2026/27 of KSh 420 billion is equivalent to 21.9 percent of the most recent audited and approved actual revenues raised nationally of  KSh  1,920.4  billion  for  FY  2021/22,  pursuant  to  Article  203  (2)  and  (3)  of  the Constitution."},{"section":"4.5.2.2 Application of Article 203 (2) of the Constitution in Division of Revenue"},{"p":92,"t":"4.5.2.2 Application of Article 203 (2) of the Constitution in Division of Revenue"},{"p":92,"t":"347. Article  203  (2)  the  Constitution  requires  that  the  equitable  share  allocation  to  counties should  not  be  less  than  fifteen  (15)  percent  of  the  last  audited  revenue  raised  nationally,  as approved by the National Assembly. The above proposed equitable share for FY 2026/27 of KSh 420.0 billion is equivalent to 21.9 percent of the audited and approved actual revenues raised nationally of KSh 1,920.4 billion for FY 2021/22, which is above the 15% minimum prescribed under the Constitution."},{"section":"4.5.2.3 Horizontal Allocation of Revenue"},{"p":92,"t":"4.5.2.3 Horizontal Allocation of Revenue"},{"p":92,"t":"348. The National Treasury proposes to allocate County Governments an equitable share of KSh 420.0  billion  from  the  shareable  revenue  raised  nationally  to  be  shared  among  county governments using the Fourth Basis formula for sharing revenue approved by Parliament under Article 217 of the Constitution."},{"p":92,"t":"349. The Fourth Basis formula which is applicable from financial year 2025/26 to financial year 2029/30 has taken into account the following parameters: 1) The Baseline Allocation Ratio; 2) Affirmative Action Allocation; and 3) The Fourth Basis indices namely: (i) Population (45%); (ii) Basic Share index (35%); (iii) Poverty Index (12%); and (iv) Geographical Size (8%)."},{"p":92,"t":"350. The three components contained in the Forth Basis as follows:"},{"p":92,"t":"The Baseline Allocation Ratio This is derived from each County's allocation for Financial Year 2024/25. The Baseline Allocation Ratio ensures that each county maintains what it had already secured in the FY 2024/25 which is meant to ensure that no county loses on revenue hence holding all Counties harmless."},{"p":93,"t":"ii) The  Affirmative  Action  Allocation  -  This  component  provides  for  equitable  share  for county governments that has been ring-fenced to cater for and be shared equally among the 12 smaller counties that are not favored by the other parameters such as population and geographical size therefore would likely receive very little allocation using the formula thus impending development. This component considers disparities among counties and aims at equitable distribution of resources across all counties in line with Article 203(1) (g)."},{"p":93,"t":"iii) The Fourth Basis indices- The third component of the formula shares out the difference using the parameters of the approved Fourth basis which are Population Index, Equal share Index, Poverty Index and Geographical Size Index. The Population Index is based on the 2019 Kenya Population and Housing Census whereas the Poverty Index is based on the 2022 Kenya Poverty Report by the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics."},{"p":93,"t":"351. The horizontal distribution of County Governments' equitable revenue share allocation of KSh 420.0 billion for FY 2026/27 shall be in accordance with the Fourth determination of the basis of the division of revenue among counties approved by Parliament pursuant to Article 217 (7) of the Constitution, as shown in Table 4.8 ."},{"p":94,"t":"Table 4.8 : Allocation of Each County Government's Equitable Share of Revenue Raised Nationally in FY 2026/27"},{"p":94,"t":"Source of Data: The National Treasury"},{"section":"4.5.2.4 Additional Allocations to County Governments in FY 2026/27"},{"p":95,"t":"4.5.2.4 Additional Allocations to County Governments in FY 2026/27"},{"p":95,"t":"352. Article  202  (2)  of  the  Constitution  provides  that  County  Governments  may  be  given additional allocations from the National Governments Share of revenue either conditionally or unconditionally; while Article 190 of the Constitution also provides that Parliament shall by legislation ensure that County Governments have adequate support to enable them to perform their  functions.  Further,  Section  4  of  the  County  Governments  Additional  Allocations  Act (CGAAA), 2025 requires that additional allocations shall be funds agreed upon by the National Assembly and the Senate during the consideration of the Budget Policy Statement and shall comprise  of  County  Governments'  additional  allocations  financed  from  either  the  National Government's Share of Revenue or proceeds of loans or grants from Development Partners. Pursuant  to  Section  5  of  the  CGAAA  2025,  funds  for  additional  allocations  to  County Governments shall be included in the budget estimates of the National Government and shall be submitted to Parliament for approval."},{"p":95,"t":"353. In the 2026 Budget Policy Statement, the National Treasury proposes to allocate KSh 75.7 billion as additional (conditional and unconditional) allocations to County Governments. Out of this, KSh 18.3 billion will be financed from the National Government's share of revenue, and KSh  57.4  billion  from  proceeds  of  loans  and  grants  from  Development  Partners.  This  is summarized in Table 4.9 ."},{"p":95,"t":"Table 4.9: Additional Allocations to County Governments in FY 2026/27"},{"p":95,"t":"Source of Data: The National Treasury"},{"section":"4.5.2.5  Allocation  of  Sharable  revenue  between  the  two  levels  of  Government  and  the additional allocations to counties from the National Government share of Revenue"},{"p":96,"t":"4.5.2.5  Allocation  of  Sharable  revenue  between  the  two  levels  of  Government  and  the additional allocations to counties from the National Government share of Revenue"},{"p":96,"t":"354. It should be noted that, and pursuant to Article 202 (2) of the Constitution, the National Government has over the years provided for additional allocations to County Governments from its  share  of  revenues.  These  primarily  conditional  allocations  are  intended  to  advance  the attainment of policy priorities objectives for both levels  of government,  including those that pertain to international commitments. Table 4.10 shows division of shareable revenue between the County Governments and National Government."},{"p":96,"t":"Table 4.10: Division of Revenue Raised Nationally FY 2020/21 -FY 2026/27 (KSh Million)"},{"p":96,"t":"Source of Data: The National Treasury"},{"section":"4.5.2.6 Disaggregation of Total Proposed Transfers to the Counties"},{"p":96,"t":"4.5.2.6 Disaggregation of Total Proposed Transfers to the Counties"},{"p":96,"t":"355. Taking  into  the  above  proposed  additional  allocations  to  County  Governments  in  FY 2026/27, the expected total transfers to County Governments is KSh 495.7 billion. Table 4.11 shows disaggregation of total proposed transfers to the Counties in FY 2026/27 and allocations in  previous  financial  year.  From  the  table,  there  is  clear  demonstration  that  there  has  been consistent growth of total transfers to County Governments over the financial years."},{"p":96,"t":"Table 4.11: Disaggregation of County Governments ' Allocation ( KSh Millions)"},{"p":96,"t":"Source of Data: The National Treasury"},{"section":"4.6 Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers"},{"p":97,"t":"4.6 Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers"},{"p":97,"t":"356. National Government Ministries Departments and Agencies (MDAs) are responsible for development of frameworks for the management of conditional additional allocations made to beneficiary  County  Governments.  These  frameworks  outline  the  total  allocation  to  each conditional  additional  allocation  and  the  specific  amount  apportioned  to  each  participating County Governments; the conditions to be met by participating County Governments; and the responsibilities of both MDAs, and beneficiary County Governments. The Accounting Officers in  the  respective  MDAs are  responsible for submission of these frameworks to the National Treasury for inclusion in the County Governments Additional Allocations Bill (CGAAB), 2026."},{"section":"4.6.1  Intergovernmental  Agreements  in  respect  of  the  Additional  Conditional Allocations"},{"p":97,"t":"4.6.1  Intergovernmental  Agreements  in  respect  of  the  Additional  Conditional Allocations"},{"p":97,"t":"357. Section 9 of the CGAAA, 2022 for FY 2021/22 vide Kenya Gazette Supplement No. 74 of 29 th April made consequential amendments to the PFM Act, 2012 to provide for among others, the  insertion  of  Sections  191A  to  191E  on  intergovernmental  agreements.  These  sections required that the National Treasury shall enter into an intergovernmental agreement with the respective County Governments for the transfer of the respective conditional allocations made to the County Governments pursuant to the Act; that such agreements shall set out any conditions that may be attached to the conditional allocations; and that the requisition of funds from the County Revenue Fund (CRF) for the purposes of a conditional grant shall be supported by the intergovernmental agreement approved under Section 191A."},{"p":97,"t":"358. However, the National Treasury prepared and submitted to the Cabinet the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Bill, 2024 which seeks to repeal Section 191 A-E of the Public Finance Management Act (CAP 412A) to provide for seamless implementation of conditional allocations while ensuring there is no duplication in management of the conditional allocations. The  Bill  has  since  then  been  approved  by  the  Cabinet  and  forwarded  to  the  Hon.  Attorney General with the accompanying Cabinet Memorandum, for onward transmission to Parliament."},{"section":"4.6.2 Mechanisms to Isolate Donor-funds from GoK funds for Additional Allocation"},{"p":97,"t":"4.6.2 Mechanisms to Isolate Donor-funds from GoK funds for Additional Allocation"},{"p":97,"t":"359. In  light  of  the  persistent  delays  in  the  approval  of  the  County  Governments  Additional Allocations Bill (CGAAB), Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council (IBEC) directed the  National  Treasury  to  initiate  a  multi-stakeholder  engagement  to  explore  and  develop alternative legislative and administrative frameworks to ensure the efficient and timely flow of conditional grants to County Governments. The National Treasury prepared the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Bill, 2025 Bill proposing to amend Sections 42 and 191 of the PFM Act to provide for submissions of two separate Bills: one covering allocations from the National Government's share of revenue and another for allocations financed by proceeds of loans and grants from Development Partners."},{"p":97,"t":"360. The amendments aim to address the delays in enactment of the CGAAB which leads to late disbursement of funds, disruption in service delivery and low absorption of allocated funds at the county level. It has also led to fiscal inefficiencies resulting in additional costs for the country in the form of commitment fees and interest charged on foreign borrowing. The submission of two separate bills will facilitate faster approval and timely disbursement of additional allocations, particularly  the  financing  from  Development  Partners.  The  amendment  Bill  has  since  been cleared  by  the  Office  of  the  Attorney  General,  approved  by  Cabinet  and  is  now  awaiting transmittal to Parliament."},{"section":"V. STATEMENT OF SPECIFIC FISCAL RISKS"},{"p":98,"t":"V. STATEMENT OF SPECIFIC FISCAL RISKS"},{"section":"5.1 Introduction"},{"p":98,"t":"5.1 Introduction"},{"p":98,"t":"361. In line with the requirements of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012, this Annexure presents the Statement of Specific Fiscal Risks (SSFR). It provides an assessment of fiscal risks that could affect the achievement of the macroeconomic targets and objectives outlined in this BPS. The Kenyan economy is estimated to have grown by 5.0 percent in 2025 and projected to expand by 5.3 percent in 2026, up from 4.7 percent in 2024, supported by favourable weather conditions, improved  agricultural productivity,  climate-smart investments, and  sustained implementation of Bottom-Up Economic Transformation Agenda (BETA) interventions."},{"p":98,"t":"362. Despite this positive outlook, downside risks remain. These arise from both domestic and external shocks, including uncertainties in macroeconomic assumptions, public debt dynamics, operations of state corporations, contingent liabilities, financial sector vulnerabilities, and natural risks. If these risks materialize, they could challenge the Government's ability to implement and sustain the fiscal and macroeconomic policies detailed in this BPS. This section also outlines the measures the Government is implementing to mitigate these risks."},{"section":"5.2 Risk in Changes in Macroeconomic Assumptions"},{"p":98,"t":"5.2 Risk in Changes in Macroeconomic Assumptions"},{"p":98,"t":"363. The  fiscal  sensitivity  analysis  assesses  the  impact  of  deviations  in  key  macroeconomic variables  on  revenue,  expenditure,  and  the  overall  budget  balance  relative  to  the  projected baseline.  The  results  confirm  that  fiscal  outcomes  remain  sensitive  to  shocks  in  economic growth, inflation, and external sector conditions (Table 5.1)."},{"p":98,"t":"364. A 1.0 percentage point reduction in real GDP growth lowers revenue by KSh 13.2 billion in FY 2026/27, widening to KSh 17.6 billion by FY 2029/30. Expenditures decline by KSh 7.2 billion in FY 2026/27 and KSh 8.8 billion in FY 2029/30, resulting in a deterioration of the budget balance by KSh 6.0 billion and KSh 7.9 billion, respectively. This highlights growth underperformance as a key downside fiscal risk."},{"p":98,"t":"Table 5.1: Fiscal Sensitivity to Key Macroeconomic Variables (KSh billion)"},{"p":98,"t":"Source of Data: National Treasury"},{"p":99,"t":"365. A 1.0 percentage point increase in inflation  raises revenues by  KSh 20.4 billion in FY 2026/27, increasing to KSh 36.6 billion by FY 2029/30, while expenditures rise by KSh 11.7 billion and KSh 18.7 billion, respectively. The net effect is an improvement in the budget balance of KSh 8.7 billion in FY 2026/27 and KSh 16.0 billion by FY 2029/30."},{"p":99,"t":"366. A 10 percent depreciation of the exchange rate increases revenues by KSh 24.0 billion in FY 2026/27 and KSh 34.7 billion in FY 2029/30, while expenditures increase by KSh 4.5 billion and  KSh  5.4  billion,  respectively.  Consequently,  the  budget  balance  improves  by  KSh  19.5 billion in FY 2026/27 and KSh 28.7 billion by FY 2029/30, underscoring exchange rate exposure in fiscal outcomes."},{"p":99,"t":"367. Under a scenario where all shocks are combined, revenues increase by KSh 46.0 billion in FY 2026/27 and KSh 51.6 billion in FY 2029/30, while expenditures rise by KSh 8.5 billion and KSh 14.7 billion, respectively. This results in an overall improvement in the budget balance of KSh 37.6 billion in FY 2026/27 and KSh 35.4 billion by FY 2029/30."},{"p":99,"t":"368. Overall,  the  analysis  indicates  that  economic  growth  shocks  pose  the  most  significant downside  risk  to  fiscal  performance,  while  inflation  and  exchange  rate  movements  tend  to improve nominal fiscal aggregates in the short to medium term. These findings reinforce the need for sustained growth, macroeconomic stability, and prudent fiscal and debt management."},{"section":"Assessment of Past Forecast Accuracy of Underlying Assumptions and Budgetary Aggregates"},{"p":99,"t":"Assessment of Past Forecast Accuracy of Underlying Assumptions and Budgetary Aggregates"},{"p":99,"t":"Figure 5.1: Deviations in Macroeconomic and Fiscal Aggregates"},{"p":99,"t":"Source: National Treasury"},{"p":100,"t":"An  assessment of past forecast accuracy indicates that Kenya's macroeconomic assumptions have remained broadly credible. Over FY 2021/22 -FY 2024/25, actual real GDP growth  and  inflation  largely  remained  within  the  projected  target  ranges,  with  only  modest deviations (Figure 5.1). The standard deviation of real GDP growth during the period was 0.2 percentage  points,  while  inflation  deviations  averaged  0.7  percentage  points.  The  largest inflation deviation of 1.3 percentage points occurred in FY 2021/22, reflecting the impact of prolonged drought conditions and heightened external shocks, including global supply chain disruptions and elevated commodity prices."},{"p":100,"t":"370. Despite the relative accuracy of macroeconomic forecasts, budgetary aggregates exhibited persistent  execution  gaps.  Total  revenue  underperformed  targets  by  an  average  of  KSh  135 billion annually, comprising shortfalls of KSh 112 billion in ordinary revenue and KSh 23 billion in  Ministerial  Appropriations-in-Aid  (A-I-A) (Table  5.2). On  the  expenditure  side,  total expenditure and net lending were underspent by an average of KSh 193 billion, mainly due to lower absorption in development expenditure (KSh 94 billion) and recurrent expenditure (KSh 68 billion). While lower recurrent spending is consistent with Government fiscal consolidation efforts  aimed  at  reducing  unproductive  expenditure,  persistent  development  underspending points to implementation and absorptive capacity constraints that may undermine growth and service delivery objectives."},{"p":100,"t":"Table 5.2: Deviations in Macroeconomic and Fiscal Aggregates"},{"p":100,"t":"Source: National Treasury"},{"p":101,"t":"Real GDP growth is projected at 5.3 percent in FY 2026/27, reflecting improved economic conditions compared to the estimated growth of 5.1 percent in FY 2025/26. However, forecast uncertainty remains, with a 95 percent confidence interval ranging between 4.9 percent and 5.7 percent, corresponding to a standard deviation of 0.2 percentage points (Figure 5.2 ). Deviations from the central growth projection could arise from adverse weather conditions, slower-thanexpected recovery in  key  sectors  or  external  shocks,  which  would  negatively  affect  revenue performance and fiscal balances."},{"p":101,"t":"Fiscal  projections  for  FY  2026/27  are  subject  to  notable  uncertainty.  Total  revenue  is projected at KSh 3,533.7 billion, with a 95 percent confidence interval of between KSh 3,150.1 billion and KSh 3,917.3 billion (standard deviation of KSh 196 billion). Total expenditure is projected at KSh 4,703.9 billion, with a confidence range of KSh 4,284.7 billion to KSh 5,119.2 billion (standard deviation of KSh 213 billion). As a result, the fiscal deficit is projected to range between  KSh  823.7  billion  and  KSh  1,404.0  billion  at  the  95  percent  confidence  level, underscoring downside risks to fiscal consolidation should revenues underperform or spending pressures materialize."},{"p":101,"t":"These uncertainties pose fiscal risks by potentially widening the fiscal deficit, increasing borrowing requirements, and exerting pressure on debt sustainability. In particular, lower-thanexpected growth or revenue outturns would necessitate either additional borrowing or in-year expenditure adjustments, while expenditure overruns could undermine ongoing fiscal consolidation efforts"},{"p":101,"t":"Figure 5.2: Confidence Intervals"},{"p":101,"t":"Source of Data: National Treasury"},{"section":"5.3 Specific Fiscal Risks"},{"p":101,"t":"5.3 Specific Fiscal Risks"},{"p":101,"t":"374. This section covers specific fiscal risk that Kenya faces and elevates the importance of effective risk management. The specific fiscal risks include:"},{"p":101,"t":"Fiscal Risks Associated with Public Debt;"},{"p":101,"t":"Fiscal Risks Arising from Accumulation of National Government 's Pending Bills;"},{"p":101,"t":"Crystallization of Contingent Liabilities;"},{"p":102,"t":"Fiscal Risks Related to Devolution;"},{"p":102,"t":"Climate Change Related Fiscal Risks to the Economy; and"},{"p":102,"t":"Other fiscal risks."},{"p":102,"t":"375. The analysis of the above specific risks is as follows:"},{"section":"5.3.1 Fiscal Risk Associated with Public Debt"},{"p":102,"t":"5.3.1 Fiscal Risk Associated with Public Debt"},{"p":102,"t":"376. The performance of the economy has a direct bearing on debt sustainability, with strong economic growth supporting improvement in debt indicators and enhancement in Government's fiscal position. Currently, key economic indicators remain robust, which provides a favourable environment for strengthening debt sustainability. Building on this momentum, the Government's strategy to sustain economic recovery and its commit ment to fiscal consolidation are expected to further improve debt ratios over the medium term. Notwithstanding this outlook, several risks remain."},{"p":102,"t":"377. Depreciation of the Kenya shilling against major currencies poses a significant threat, given that approximately 47.0 percent of the public debt portfolio is denominated in foreign currencies, thereby could increase external debt service costs. Tight global financial conditions and elevated domestic interest rates could further raise the cost of new borrowing, heighten rollover risks for maturing obligations and increase the overall interest payment burden. The substantial share of domestic  debt  held  in  Treasury  Bills  also  exposes  the  Government  to  frequent  refinancing pressures, underscoring the need for proactive liability management, including the gradual shift towards medium and long-term Treasury Bonds."},{"p":102,"t":"378. In  addition,  guarantees  extended  to  State-Owned  Enterprises  (SOEs)  and  commitments under Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) present contingent fiscal risks, particularly where these entities  face  financial  distress,  which  may  necessitate  Government  intervention  and  elevate public debt service obligations. Continuous monitoring of these exposures, alongside establishing  a  dedicated  budget  line  for  contingent  liabilities,  remains  essential  to  safeguard fiscal  stability.  Furthermore,  adverse shocks to projected revenues could  intensify borrowing pressures and contribute to higher-than-planned debt accumulation."},{"section":"5.3.2 Crystallization of Contingent Liabilities"},{"p":102,"t":"5.3.2 Crystallization of Contingent Liabilities"},{"p":102,"t":"379. Contingent  liabilities  are  potential  obligations  from  uncertain  events,  recognised  in financial statements only when probable and measurable; otherwise, they are disclosed. They may  be  explicit,  arising  from  legal  or  contractual  commitments,  or  implicit,  from  moral  or political  expectations. Often excluded from the budget, they can act as hidden subsidies and create  fiscal  risks.  To  safeguard  fiscal  sustainability,  the  Government  will  systematically identify, assess, monitor, and disclose all contingent liabilities, strengthening transparency, risk management, and resource planning."},{"section":"5.3.2.1 State Corporations / Government Owned Enterprises (GOEs)"},{"p":102,"t":"5.3.2.1 State Corporations / Government Owned Enterprises (GOEs)"},{"p":102,"t":"380. State Corporations continue to represent a significant source of contingent liabilities to the Government due to their legal and financial autonomy to contract obligations, often with explicit or implicit Government support. Fiscal risks arise where the Government may be required to intervene in the event that an entity is unable to meet its financial obligations, thereby creating unplanned pressure on the Exchequer. The key sources of fiscal risk from State Corporations and Government-Owned Enterprises (GOEs) include:"},{"p":103,"t":"Explicit  and  implicit  contingent  liabilities:  These  arise  from  government-guaranteed loans, on-lent loans, commercial borrowing, legal claims, pending bills, and operational failures.  Underperformance  or  weak  financial  management  in  State  Corporations  can trigger Government intervention, even in the absence of a legal obligation."},{"p":103,"t":"ii) Risks  from  Government-Linked  Companies  (GLCs):  In  entities  where  Government ownership is below 50 percent, direct oversight is limited. However, the Government may still face contractual, moral or political pressure to provide financial support in the event of distress, creating implicit fiscal exposure."},{"p":103,"t":"iii) Moral-hazard and concentration risks: Given the strategic importance of certain entities, their  failure  could  have  wider  economic  and  social  consequences,  increasing  the likelihood of Government support and disrupting budget execution."},{"p":103,"t":"These risks translate into measurable fiscal exposure, reflected in outstanding guarantees, on-lent loans, non-guaranteed debt and arrears held by State Corporations, as summarized below:"},{"p":103,"t":"Government-guaranteed debt: As at 30 June 2025, outstanding guarantees amounted to KSh 83.2 billion, a decline from KSh 100.2 billion in FY 2023/24, largely due to loan repayments. Beneficiary entities include Kenya  Electricity  Generating  Company (KENGEN), Kenya Ports Authority (KPA) and Kenya Airways (KQ)."},{"p":103,"t":"ii) Non-guaranteed SOE debt: Fourteen (14) State-Owned Enterprises held KSh 44.9 billion in non-guaranteed debt (0.3 percent of GDP), independently contracted without recourse to Government support, but still posing potential implicit fiscal risk."},{"p":103,"t":"iii) On-lent  loan  exposure:  The  cumulative  on-lent  loan  portfolio  stood  at  KSh  1,051.1 billion, with Kenya Railways Corporation accounting for KSh 547.4 billion (52 percent), indicating a high concentration risk within a single entity."},{"p":103,"t":"iv) Pending bills: Outstanding pending bills exceeded KSh 25 billion as at 30 th June 2025, mainly relating to unpaid contractors for capital projects, unremitted taxes and pension contributions, and unpaid utility charges."},{"p":103,"t":"In order to mitigate the SOE-related fiscal risks, the Government will continue to implement the following measures and reforms:"},{"p":103,"t":"Strengthening oversight,  governance  and financial discipline through continuous financial evaluation and fiscal risk analysis by the National Treasury."},{"p":103,"t":"ii) Implementation  of  the  Mwongozo  Code  of  Governance,  establishment  of  audit committees,  and  operationalization  of  risk  management  frameworks  across  State Corporations, supported by the PFM Act and Public Audit Act."},{"p":103,"t":"iii) Application of Capital Markets Authority 's governance regulations for State Corporations  and  Government-Linked  Companies  listed  on  the  Nairobi  Securities Exchange to enhance transparency, accountability and disclosure."},{"p":103,"t":"iv) Strengthening  implementation  of  State  Corporation  reforms,  including  restructuring, aimed at reducing reliance on the Exchequer and creating fiscal space. Following Cabinet approval for implementation of the Reforms, the National Treasury constituted a MultiAgency Technical Working Committee. The Committee, conducted assessments of the entities identified for reforms under Phase One and: i) Reviewed and drafted necessary legislation (amendments, repeals, and new laws); ii) Assessed staff for redeployment or reassignment  to  ensure  no  job  losses;  and  iii)  Documented  assets  and  liabilities  of affected entities for action."},{"p":104,"t":"Implementation of privatization and restructuring initiatives under the Privatisation Act, 2023,  particularly  for  commercial  State  Corporations,  to  improve  efficiency,  attract private capital and support fiscal consolidation."},{"section":"5.3.2.2 Public Private Partnerships (PPP) Projects"},{"p":104,"t":"5.3.2.2 Public Private Partnerships (PPP) Projects"},{"p":104,"t":"383. Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) remain a key instrument for mobilizing private capital for infrastructure development and easing short-term fiscal pressures. However, the growing PPP portfolio, comprising 36 projects at various stages, also exposes the Government to significant fiscal  risks.  These  risks  mainly  stem  from  contingent  liabilities  and  long-term  contractual commitments, including  potential  breaches  of  contract,  unfunded  additional  obligations,  and exposure  to  inflation  and  exchange  rate  movements.  Against  this  backdrop,  the  fiscal  risks associated with PPPs are assessed through the Government's exposure to specific implemented and planned projects, as outlined below:"},{"p":104,"t":"Implemented PPP projects in the FY 2024/25 mobilized a total of KSh 145.7 billion in private capital. Key projects in the year included: a) Galana-Kulalu Food Security Project (KSh 6.0 billion -additional investment): implementation, performance and operational risks  that  may  necessitate  further  fiscal  support;  and  b)  Orpower  22  Menengai Geothermal Power Plant (KSh 11.7 billion): off-taker and payment risks typical of energy PPPs, with potential implications for Government guarantees and contractual obligations;"},{"p":104,"t":"ii) Large-scale PPP projects under implementation in the FY 2025/26 are expected to raise a total of KSh 65.0 billion. Projects under implementation include: a) Rironi -Nakuru -Mau  Summit  Road  Project  (KSh  150  billion):  traffic  demand  uncertainty,  revenue shortfalls  and  potential  renegotiation  risks;  b)  Africa  50  transmission  lines  (KSh  41 billion):  foreign  exchange exposure, construction and completion risks; and c) NTSA new  generation  driving  licence  and  traffic  monitoring  system  (KSh  45  billion): technology, performance and contract renegotiation risks. These projects also face crosscutting risks related to inflation and exchange rate volatility, which may crystallize into Government obligations where risk allocation is not effectively enforced; and"},{"p":104,"t":"iii) Planned PPP projects in the FY 2026/27 are expected to raise a total of KSh 50.0 billion. Planned  projects  during  the  year  will  include:  a)  University  of  Nairobi  purpose-built student  accommodation  (KSh  9.2  billion);  b)  Sabaki  Water  Carrier  Project  (KSh  28 billion) for abstraction of 80,000 m 3 /day water from the Baricho aquifer among others; and c) Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital expansion (KSh 4.0 billion) - expansion of Teaching and Student Accommodation Facilities at the Ultra-Modern College of Health Sciences."},{"p":104,"t":"384. To mitigate these fiscal risks, the Government has instituted the following measures:"},{"p":104,"t":"Strengthening the legal and institutional framework under the PPP Act, 2021, including the  review  and  alignment  of  existing  PPP  regulations  and  Project  Facilitation  Fund Regulations, 2017;"},{"p":104,"t":"ii) Enhanced oversight by the Public Private Partnerships Committee (PPPC) and the PPP Directorate,  supported  by  ongoing  capacity  strengthening  in  project  appraisal,  risk allocation and contract management;"},{"p":104,"t":"iii) Implementation  of  a  joint  Public  Investment  Management -PPP  (PIM-PPP)  planning framework  to  ensure  that  projects  meet  affordability,  value-for-money  and  socioeconomic return thresholds prior to approval;"},{"p":105,"t":"iv) Improved  transparency  and  disclosure,  including  mandatory  publication  of  Privately Initiated Proposals (PIPs), structured public participation, and disclosure of intended and ongoing PPP projects; and"},{"p":105,"t":"Provision  of  Government  Support  Measures  (GSMs),  including  Letters  of  Support, Partial  Risk  Guarantees  and  Indemnity  Agreements,  where  justified,  with  associated contingent liabilities closely monitored and disclosed to safeguard fiscal sustainability and limit undue exposure to the Exchequer."},{"section":"5.3.3 Fiscal Risks Related to Devolution"},{"p":105,"t":"5.3.3 Fiscal Risks Related to Devolution"},{"p":105,"t":"385. Section 107 (2) (f) of the PFM Act, 2012 require County Treasuries to manage their fiscal risks prudently. During the review period, a number of fiscal risks were identified in revenue and expenditure performance. These are:"},{"p":105,"t":"High levels of pending bills that negatively affects effective delivery of public services as well as local business development. According to OCOB, as at 30th June 2025, County Governments reported outstanding pending bills amounting to KSh 176.9 billion."},{"p":105,"t":"ii) Non-remittance of statutory deductions by some County Governments more especially pension contributions, posing a huge challenge to the social security of the pensioners;"},{"p":105,"t":"iii) High expenditure on wage bill that lowers the ability of County Governments to meet financial obligations on operations & maintenance and development requirements. In the FY 2024/25, on average as reported by the OCOB, the County Governments expenditure on wages was 41.4 percent of their total revenue; and,"},{"p":105,"t":"iv) Underperformance in OSR, which results in unfunded budgets resulting to accumulation of pending bills. County Governments collectively collected 67.3 billion against a target of KSh 87.7 billion representing 76.8 percent of their target in FY 2024/25."},{"section":"5.3.4 Climate Change Related Fiscal Risks to the Economy"},{"p":105,"t":"5.3.4 Climate Change Related Fiscal Risks to the Economy"},{"p":105,"t":"386. Climate change in Kenya is characterized by a clear warming trend alongside highly variable and increasingly unpredictable rainfall patterns. Average annual temperatures have risen by slightly  over  1°C  since  the  1950s,  with  an  accelerated  increase  observed  from  the  1990s onwards (Figure 5.3), consistent with regional and global warming trends. Rainfall patterns have become  more  erratic  in  both  spatial  and  temporal  distribution,  with  increased  frequency  of rainfall extremes, including prolonged droughts and intense precipitation events. These climatic changes have contributed to more frequent and severe climate-related hazards such as droughts, floods, and landslides, resulting in significant socio-economic and developmental challenges, particularly  for  agriculture,  water  resources,  infrastructure,  and  livelihoods.  The  impacts  are further exacerbated  by limited adaptive capacity, including inadequate climate-resilient infrastructure  and  insufficient  early  warning  systems,  and  constrained  access  to  appropriate technologies (World Bank, 2023; Government of Kenya, 2023)."},{"p":106,"t":"Figure 5.3: Observed Annual Average Mean Surface Air Temperature of Kenya, 19012024"},{"p":106,"t":"Source: World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal"},{"p":106,"t":"Kenya is highly vulnerable to climate-related hazards, particularly recurrent droughts and floods, which pose significant social, economic, and environmental risks. Severe droughts now occur approximately every 5 -7 years, while moderate droughts and flood events are experienced every 2 -3 years, reflecting increasing climate variability and extremes. These hazards result in loss of life, heightened food and water insecurity, reduced agricultural and livestock productivity, infrastructure damage, loss of biodiversity, resource-based conflicts and rising economic losses."},{"p":106,"t":"Between 1964 and 2025, floods resulted in 2,647 deaths, and droughts have affected over 61 million people ( Table 5.3 ). Trends show a rising frequency of floods, landslides, and storms, and climate change is expected to exacerbate these events, increasing both their frequency and severity. For example, the 2022-2023 drought followed severe flooding in 2019-2020. As these climate  risks  continue  to  intensify,  the  need  for  robust  adaptation  and  mitigation  strategies becomes even more urgent to reduce their impact on Kenya's population and economy."},{"p":106,"t":"According to the State of the Climate Kenya (2024), the year 2024 was Kenya's hottest year  on  record.  Rainfall  was  highly  variable:  western  and  central  highlands  received  aboveaverage rains, while most other regions were drier than normal. Floods displaced over 100,000 households, destroyed crops and infrastructure, and caused damages exceeding KSh 400 million in coastal regions. In addition, poor short rains worsened food insecurity, with the number of food-insecure people doubling from 1 million in July 2024 to 2.15 million by February 2025."},{"p":106,"t":"Climate events account for a significant proportion of natural disasters in Kenya, and the damage caused by these events underscores the urgency of investing in resilient infrastructure across sectors such as energy, water resources, agriculture, and tourism."},{"p":106,"t":"Table 5.3: Natural Disasters in Kenya, 1964-2025"},{"p":106,"t":"Source: EM-DAT, the International Disaster Database (2025)"},{"section":"5.3.4.1 Specific Fiscal Risks related to Climate Change"},{"p":107,"t":"5.3.4.1 Specific Fiscal Risks related to Climate Change"},{"section":"Nature of Specific Fiscal Risks"},{"p":107,"t":"Nature of Specific Fiscal Risks"},{"p":107,"t":"Kenya's key economic sectors are highly exposed to climate change, with sector-specific vulnerabilities and economy-wide implications:"},{"p":107,"t":"Agriculture: As  the  backbone  of  the  economy,  agriculture  is  highly  climate  dependent. Increased  rainfall  variability,  droughts,  and  extreme  weather  events  reduce  crop  yields, undermine food security, and threaten rural livelihoods."},{"p":107,"t":"ii) Energy : Kenya's energy sector -especially hydropower -is vulnerable to changing rainfall patterns, increasing risks of power shortages. Rising temperatures also reduce the efficiency of geothermal plants and transmission systems."},{"p":107,"t":"iii) Labour Productivity : Higher temperatures lower labour productivity, especially for outdoor workers in agriculture, forestry, and fisheries, with disproportionate impacts in arid and semiarid regions."},{"p":107,"t":"iv) Road Transport : With approximately 93 percent of freight and passenger traffic depending on roads, climate-induced disruptions like flooding and road degradation during extreme weather events can isolate regions and hinder trade and mobility."},{"p":107,"t":"Tourism and Wildlife : Climate change alters ecosystems, wildlife habitats, and migration patterns, reducing the attractiveness of nature-based tourism and threatening a key source of foreign exchange."},{"p":107,"t":"vi) Water Resources : Climate variability intensifies water scarcity and degrades water quality, constraining  domestic  consumption,  agricultural  production,  and  energy  generation,  with cascading effects on health and economic activity."},{"p":107,"t":"vii) Health & Education : The rising frequency of hot days and nights has led to increased health risks (KMD, 2022). Floods and heat extremes damage infrastructure, disrupt access to health and  education  services,  increase  water-borne  diseases,  and  reduce  food  availability  and school attendance during droughts."},{"section":"5.3.4.2 Long Term Climate Change Fiscal Risks Analysis Using Q-CRAFT"},{"p":107,"t":"5.3.4.2 Long Term Climate Change Fiscal Risks Analysis Using Q-CRAFT"},{"p":107,"t":"Climate  change  is  already  exerting  measurable  impacts  on  Kenya's  economy,  with potentially  far-reaching  macroeconomic  and  fiscal  consequences  over  the  long  term.  Rising temperatures associated with climate change are expected to adversely affect economic growth and undermine the sustainability of public finances, thereby heightening fiscal risks. Using the Quantitative Climate Change Risk Assessment Fiscal Tool (Q-CRAFT), this analysis assesses how changes in temperature influence economic activity and, in turn, affect fiscal outcomes, leading to increasing fiscal pressures over time. The assessment is undertaken over a long-term horizon extending to the end of the century in order to capture the gradual and compounding nature of climate change impacts on the economy and public finances."},{"p":107,"t":"The analysis evaluates four alternative scenarios reflecting progressively severe climate change outcomes relative to a baseline scenario that assumes the continuation of the current macro-fiscal trajectory in the absence of climate change effects. Table 5.4 presents the climate change  scenarios  for  Kenya,  together  with  the  corresponding  projected  increases  in  global temperatures and their implications for temperature changes in Kenya"},{"p":108,"t":"Table 5.4: Climate Change Scenarios in Kenya"},{"section":"5.3.4.3 Macroeconomic Impacts of Climate Change"},{"p":108,"t":"5.3.4.3 Macroeconomic Impacts of Climate Change"},{"p":108,"t":"394. Under  the  Paris  Agreement -aligned  scenario,  there  is  a  modest  improvement  in macroeconomic outcomes, with the level of GDP higher by about 0.5 percentage points by 2100, alongside improved labour productivity growth. This reflects the mitigating effect of  climate action measures in reducing the adverse economic impacts of climate change. In contrast, the remaining climate change scenarios result in progressively larger and compounding declines in both GDP levels and labour productivity, albeit to differing degrees. While the annual impact on growth appears relatively small, these effects accumulate substantially over the long term. Under the high-temperature (hot) scenario, the level of GDP is projected to be about 4.2 percentage points lower than the baseline by the end of the century (Figure 5.4), consistent with estimated climate change impacts observed in comparable countries in the region."},{"p":108,"t":"Figure 5.4: Macroeconomic Effects of Climate Change in Kenya (2015-2099)"},{"p":108,"t":"Source: Q-CRAFT (2025)"},{"section":"5.3.4.4 Effects of Climate Change on Fiscal Projections"},{"p":109,"t":"5.3.4.4 Effects of Climate Change on Fiscal Projections"},{"p":109,"t":"Assuming Government expenditure remains unchanged while revenues decline due to weaker GDP growth, the analysis shows that Kenya's primary deficit would widen under all climate  change  scenarios,  except  under  the  Paris-aligned  scenario.  This  would  translate  into higher net borrowing requirements and an upward pressure on the debt-to-GDP ratio ( Figure 5.5). These  results  underscore  the  importance  of  proactive  fiscal  risk  mitigation  measures, including strengthening domestic revenue mobilisation, improving expenditure efficiency, and enhancing debt management strategies to preserve fiscal sustainability."},{"p":109,"t":"At the same time, the findings highlight the need to integrate climate considerations into fiscal planning through climate-responsive budgeting, particularly by prioritising investments in climate-resilient infrastructure and human capital that can reduce long-term economic and fiscal vulnerabilities.  Managing  the  trade-off  between  fiscal  consolidation  and  growth-enhancing, climate-adaptive investment will therefore be critical. In contrast, outcomes under the baseline and Paris-aligned scenarios indicate a declining debt-to-GDP ratio over the medium to long term, consistent with the Government's objective of maintaining public debt at 55 percent of GDP in net present value terms."},{"p":109,"t":"The primary balance gap (PB gap), defined as the difference between the debt-stabilising primary balance and the projected primary balance, provides an indication of the magnitude of fiscal adjustment required to stabilise public debt. A wider gap implies a greater need for fiscal restructuring. Under the baseline scenario, the required fiscal consolidation is relatively modest, at  about  0.1  percentage  points  of  GDP  over  the  projection  horizon.  However,  when  climate change impacts are incorporated, the required adjustment increases to approximately 0.4 percent of GDP (Figure 5.6)."},{"p":109,"t":"This  reinforces  the  case  for  embedding  climate  risks  within  the  fiscal  framework, including  through  systematic  identification,  quantification,  and  disclosure  of  climate-related fiscal risks, and the use of climate-responsive budgeting tools to guide resource allocation toward mitigation and adaptation measures that can lower future fiscal pressures."},{"p":109,"t":"Figure 5.5: Effects of Climate Change on Fiscal Projections (2015-2095)"},{"p":110,"t":"Figure 5.6: Primary Balance Gap (percent of GDP)"},{"section":"5.3.4.5 Enhancing Analysis of the Climate Change Impact to the Economy: Greening the Macroeconomic Model"},{"p":110,"t":"5.3.4.5 Enhancing Analysis of the Climate Change Impact to the Economy: Greening the Macroeconomic Model"},{"p":110,"t":"The World Bank, in collaboration with the Government of Kenya through the National Treasury, initiated a program to strengthen macroeconomic modelling capacity and to integrate climate change considerations into macroeconomic analysis, drawing on data from the Natural Capital Accounts. The engagement has progressively built technical capacity among officers from the National Treasury, State Department of Planning and the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS), and has supported the development of a customized macroeconomic model for Kenya, known as KENMod. This initiative reflects Government efforts to enhance evidencebased policymaking by embedding climate change and natural capital considerations into the macro-fiscal framework."},{"p":110,"t":"In parallel, significant progress has been made in the development and institutionalization of  Natural  Capital  Accounting  (NCA)  by  KNBS.  Advances  have  been  recorded  in  the Ecosystem,  Energy,  Forest,  and  Water  Accounts,  with  the  natural  capital  dataset  currently extending  to  2023  and  ongoing  efforts  underway  to  update  and  expand  coverage.  Further progress  includes  the  development  of  an  Investment  Prioritization  Tool  for  land  restoration, which  supports  evidence-based  decision-making  aligned  with  the  National  Landscape  and Ecosystem  Restoration  Strategy.  In  addition,  the  establishment  of  a  National  Plan  for  the Advancement  of  Environmental-Economic  Accounting  has  strengthened  the  institutional framework for NCA, providing a platform for structured coordination, including discussions on the formation of a National Steering Committee and the systematic integration of natural capital data into national planning and policy processes."},{"p":110,"t":"Building on these data and institutional advances, the Macro-Fiscal Model (MFMod) provides  the  analytical  framework  underpinning  KENMod.  MFMod  is  a  structural  macro econometric  model  with  estimated  equations  that  supports  macroeconomic  forecasting  and policy  analysis  across  key  variables,  including  GDP,  consumption,  investment,  government spending,  exports  and  imports,  wages,  exchange  rates,  and  monetary  and  fiscal  policy transmission channels. The model is customized to reflect country-specific economic structures and  is  estimated  using  national  data  within  an  error-correction  framework  that  ensures consistency  with  economic  theory  in  the  long  run  while  capturing  short-term  economic dynamics."},{"p":111,"t":"Through  KENMod,  climate  change  and  natural  capital  considerations  are  explicitly incorporated  into  macro-fiscal  projections  and  policy  simulations,  enabling  more  robust economic analysis, improved fiscal planning, and the promotion of long-term sustainability and shared prosperity. To  strengthen the integration of  climate  change  and  environmental sustainability into macro-fiscal analysis, KENMod incorporates a Climate and Natural Capital Extension comprising four interlinked analytical channels. These extensions enable the explicit transmission  of  climate  and  environmental  shocks  into  macroeconomic  and  fiscal  outcomes, thereby  enhancing  the  assessment  of  climate-related  fiscal  risks  and  policy  responses.  They include:"},{"p":111,"t":"Climate Damages Module :  Labor heat stress, Human health, water and heat stress, erosion and land degradation, Livestock, Inland flooding, Roads and bridges."},{"p":111,"t":"Reconstruction and Adaptation Module : analyzes investments in reconstruction and adaptation, modeling their costs and benefits in reducing damages."},{"p":111,"t":"Energy,  Emissions,  and  Pollution  Module :  includes  energy  as  a  production  factor, assesses carbon pricing impacts, and tracks CO2 emissions and local air pollutants like PM 2.5."},{"p":111,"t":"Land Use and Natural Capital Module : model of land allocation (relative land price includes  ecosystem  services)  and  the  measurement  of  Adjusted  Net  Savings  (capture resources depletion)."},{"p":111,"t":"Collectively,  these  four  channels  enable  KENMod  to  comprehensively  assess  the macroeconomic and fiscal implications of climate change, natural capital depletion, and policy responses. By integrating climate damages, adaptation, mitigation, and natural capital dynamics into the macro-fiscal framework, the model supports more informed fiscal planning, enhanced risk management, and the design of policies that promote climate resilience, sustainability, and inclusive growth."},{"section":"Economic Policy Simulations"},{"p":111,"t":"Economic Policy Simulations"},{"p":111,"t":"Economic policy simulations were conducted using KENMod, beginning with a baseline scenario that reflects the projected trajectory of the economy in the absence of additional shocks. Against this baseline, four climate-related scenarios were simulated to assess the macroeconomic and fiscal impacts of climate shocks on GDP, inflation, and fiscal aggregates:"},{"p":111,"t":"The first scenario models a 10 percent reduction in crop yields in 2026, capturing droughtinduced losses in agricultural output."},{"p":111,"t":"The second scenario simulates a 20 percent decline in livestock output in 2026, reflecting severe drought impacts on pastoral and livestock systems."},{"p":111,"t":"The third scenario assesses flood-related damage to roads and bridges in 2027 equivalent to 2 percent of the public capital stock, with the monetary value of damage approximated using the capital-stock-to-GDP ratio."},{"p":111,"t":"The fourth scenario combines all three climate shocks, crop yield losses, livestock output declines, and flood-related infrastructure damage, to capture the compounded macroeconomic and fiscal effects of concurrent climate events."},{"section":"Results of the simulations"},{"p":112,"t":"Results of the simulations"},{"section":"i. Impact of climate related shocks on real GDP and inflation"},{"p":112,"t":"i. Impact of climate related shocks on real GDP and inflation"},{"p":112,"t":"Analysis of climate-related shocks indicates significant short- and medium-term effects on Kenya's economic performance. A drought affecting crop production in 2026 is projected to reduce output noticeably, reflecting immediate losses in agricultural value added and spillover effects across the broader economy. Droughts affecting livestock production generate smaller, though  still  meaningful,  GDP  losses,  consistent  with  their  relatively  lower  economy-wide linkages (Figure 5.7)."},{"p":112,"t":"In comparison, flood events, such as those simulated for 2027, result in deeper and more persistent contractions in GDP. Unlike droughts, which tend to dissipate quickly, floods damage infrastructure,  reducing  productive  capacity  and  increasing  transaction  costs.  Consequently, GDP remains below the baseline for several years, highlighting the slower recovery associated with capital stock destruction."},{"p":112,"t":"Scenarios combining drought and flood shocks produce the largest and most enduring output declines. Losses are amplified when agricultural shocks precede infrastructure damage, indicating nonlinear interaction effects. These compound shocks, affecting both food production and  transport  networks,  significantly  weaken  economic  resilience  and  prolong  recovery, underscoring the macroeconomic risks posed by consecutive or simultaneous climate events."},{"p":112,"t":"Climate shocks affect inflation primarily in the short term. Crop-related drought shocks in 2026 lead to a pronounced spike in inflation, reflecting immediate food price pressures, while livestock drought shocks in the same year generate smaller but noticeable inflationary pressures. The  combined  shocks  spanning  2026 -2027  produces  the  largest  and  most  volatile  inflation, reflecting compounded supply constraints across agricultural subsectors. Following the initial spike, inflation briefly undershoots the baseline before gradually converging back, suggesting that price pressures dissipate over time as the economy adjusts."},{"p":112,"t":"Overall,  droughts  tend  to  generate  sharp  but  temporary  GDP  and  inflation  effects, whereas floods produce deeper, longer-lasting output losses. When occurring in combination, climate shocks can amplify economic disruption, highlighting the need for targeted climate risk management and resilience-building measures."},{"p":112,"t":"Figure 5.7: Impact of Climate Related Shocks to GDP and Inflation"},{"p":112,"t":"Source: The National Treasury"},{"section":"ii. Impact of climate related shocks on Fiscal Aggregates"},{"p":113,"t":"ii. Impact of climate related shocks on Fiscal Aggregates"},{"p":113,"t":"Climate-related shocks are projected to have significant implications for fiscal outcomes. Droughts affecting crops and livestock in 2026 reduce agricultural output, lowering GDP and government revenues while increasing expenditure pressures. Crop-related droughts lead to a sharp  but  relatively  contained  deterioration  in  the  budget  balance,  followed  by  gradual stabilization. Livestock droughts generate smaller and less volatile fiscal effects, with a faster recovery path, reflecting greater resilience in the livestock sector."},{"p":113,"t":"Floods in 2027 produce the most severe fiscal impact. Infrastructure damage equivalent to 2 percent of the capital stock raises public spending needs while simultaneously weakening economic  activity,  resulting  in  a  pronounced  and  persistent  decline  in  the  budget  balance. Combined drought and flood shocks amplify these effects, producing a sustained deficit that remains significantly below baseline through 2026 -2027."},{"p":113,"t":"Across all scenarios, the debt-to-GDP ratio rises steadily, while government revenues fall sharply and recover only partially. By the end of the projection period, the simulations point to a high-debt, low-revenue fiscal position, highlighting that climate shocks, particularly floods and their interaction with drought-induced agricultural losses, can impose long-lasting constraints on fiscal  sustainability.  These  findings  underscore  the  importance  of  integrating  climate  risk considerations into fiscal planning, debt management, and resilience-building measures."},{"p":113,"t":"Figure 5.8: Impact of Climate Related Shocks on Fiscal Aggregates"},{"p":113,"t":"Source: The National Treasury"},{"section":"5.3.5 Other Fiscal Risks"},{"p":113,"t":"5.3.5 Other Fiscal Risks"},{"section":"5.3.5.1 Natural Disasters and Man-made Hazards"},{"p":113,"t":"5.3.5.1 Natural Disasters and Man-made Hazards"},{"p":113,"t":"Disasters continue to be a major threat to various economies across the globe causing fiscal constraints, affecting lives and livelihoods. The Government will continue to fast track the finalization  of  the  disaster  risk  financing  framework  under  the  PFM  CAP  412A  in  order  to mobilize resources towards efficient and effective disaster risk management in the country."},{"p":113,"t":"Further, the Government will fast-track the finalization of the Disaster Risk Financing Strategy 2026-2030, focusing on six Strategic Priorities to : i) ensure a coordinated approach to disaster risk financing and disaster risk reduction across national and County Governments; ii) Enhance  capacity    and  raise  awareness  in  MDAs  and  County  Governments  on  the  need  to"},{"p":114,"t":"strengthen disaster preparedness and response capacity of for resilience; iii)  Promote transparency  and  fiscal  accountability  of  disaster  related  expenditures;  iv)  Improvement financing capacity by strengthening and expanding the Government's portfolio of disaster risk financing instruments; v) support key programs to protect the most vulnerable populations from the impacts of disasters and contribute to building resilience; and vi) To promote financing for disaster prevention and preparedness to reduce future disaster risks."},{"section":"5.3.5.2 Money Laundering, Terrorist Financing & Proliferation Financing"},{"p":114,"t":"5.3.5.2 Money Laundering, Terrorist Financing & Proliferation Financing"},{"p":114,"t":"415. The National Treasury  will  continue  to  lead  Kenya's  strategic  response  following  its placement  on  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force  (FATF)  list  of  jurisdictions  under  increased monitoring  (FATF  Grey  List).  This  will  be  anchored  on  a  coordinated  reform  agenda encompassing  legislative  amendments,  institutional  strengthening,  and  enhanced  compliance oversight, each aimed at addressing the technical deficiencies identified by FATF. As chair of the National Taskforce on Anti-Money Laundering, Combating the Financing of Terrorism, and Countering the Financing of Proliferation (AML/CFT/CPF), the National Treasury will ensure robust inter-agency collaboration across implementing entities, law enforcement, and regulatory bodies, while reinforcing risk-based supervision of financial institutions and designated nonfinancial businesses and professions (DNFBPs)."},{"p":114,"t":"416. In addition, the National Treasury will oversee the implementation of the International Cooperation  Review  Group  (ICRG)  Action  Plan  matrix,  ensuring  measurable  progress  and timely reporting to both FATF and ESAAMLG. Kenya remains firmly committed to sustaining the  reform  momentum,  achieving  sector-wide  compliance,  and  delivering  demonstrable outcomes that restore global financial credibility, enhance investor confidence, and safeguard the integrity of its financial system."},{"section":"ANNEX  1: ADHERENCE  TO  FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY PRINCIPLES"},{"p":115,"t":"ANNEX  1: ADHERENCE  TO  FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY PRINCIPLES"},{"p":115,"t":"In line with the Constitution, the Public Finance Management (PFM) Act, 2012, the PFM (National  Government)  Regulations,  2015  and  in  keeping  with  prudent  and  transparent management  of  public  resources,  the  Government  has  adhered  to  the  fiscal  responsibility principles as set out in the statute as follows (Table 1) ."},{"p":115,"t":"Over  the  medium  term  a  minimum  of  thirty  percent  of  the  National  and  County Governments budget shall be allocated to the development expenditure;"},{"p":115,"t":"ii) National government's expenditure on the compensation of employees (including benefits and allowances) shall not exceed 35 percent of the National Government's equitable share of the revenue raised nationally plus other revenues generated by the National Government;"},{"p":115,"t":"iii) Over the medium term, the National Government's borrowings shall be used only for the purpose of financing development expenditure and not for recurrent expenditure;"},{"p":115,"t":"iv) Public  debt  and  obligations  shall  be  maintained  at  a  sustainable  level  as  approved  by Parliament for the National Government and the County Assembly for County Governments;"},{"p":115,"t":"Fiscal risks shall be managed prudently; and"},{"p":115,"t":"vi) A reasonable degree of predictability with respect to the level of tax rates and tax bases shall be maintained, taking into account any tax reforms that may be made in the future."},{"p":115,"t":"Table 1: Performance of Fiscal Responsibility Indicators"},{"p":115,"t":"Source: The National Treasury"},{"section":"i) Allocation to Development Expenditure over the Medium Term"},{"p":116,"t":"i) Allocation to Development Expenditure over the Medium Term"},{"p":116,"t":"In alignment with statutory provisions, the National Government continues to anchor its budget framework on the requirement that development expenditures constitute no less than 30 percent of total ministerial spending. In FY 2024/25, actual development outlays accounted for 25.1 percent, falling below the threshold set under the PFM Act, Cap. 412. This variance relative to  the  earlier  projection  of  26.2  percent  stemmed  from  expenditure  rationalization  measures undertaken during budget execution."},{"p":116,"t":"Looking ahead, the share of development spending is expected to rise to 28.6 percent in FY 2026/27 and remain above the recommended minimum over the medium term, as illustrated in Table 1 and Figure 1."},{"p":116,"t":"Figure 1: Development Expenditures as a Percent of Total National Government Budget"},{"p":116,"t":"Source: The National Treasury"},{"section":"ii) Compliance with the Requirement on Expenditure on Wages and Benefits"},{"p":116,"t":"ii) Compliance with the Requirement on Expenditure on Wages and Benefits"},{"p":116,"t":"The  legal  framework  stipulates  that  expenditure  by  the  National  Government  on compensation of employees including salaries, benefits,  and  allowances  must  not  exceed  35 percent of the National Government's equitable share of nationally raised revenues toget her with other  revenues  generated  under  Article  209(4)  of  the  Constitution.  In  adherence  to  this requirement, the National Government's wage and benefits bill accounted for 2 4.9 percent of revenues in FY 2024/25, remaining well within the statutory ceiling of 35 percent. Over the medium term, this ratio is projected to decline further to 23.1 percent in FY 2026/27 (Figure 2) ."},{"p":117,"t":"Figure 2: Wages as a Percentage of National Government Revenues"},{"p":117,"t":"Wages: For teachers and civil servants including the police. The figure includes the funds allocated for the pension contributory scheme"},{"p":117,"t":"Source: National Treasury"},{"section":"iii) Compliance with the Requirement to use National Government's Borrowings only for Financing Development Expenditure"},{"p":117,"t":"iii) Compliance with the Requirement to use National Government's Borrowings only for Financing Development Expenditure"},{"p":117,"t":"The  National  Treasury  continues  to  mobilize  resources  through  borrowing  to  finance development programmes endorsed by Parliament in accordance with Section 15(2) (c) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012, which stipulates that national government borrowing shall  be  directed  solely  toward  development  expenditure  and  not  recurrent  spending.  The Government remains fully committed to this fiscal principle and consistently ensures that all borrowing is applied strictly to development outlays. During FY 2024/25, KSh 273.9 billion of the total KSh 1,034.2 billion in borrowing was allocated to development expenditure. Looking ahead, borrowing requirements are projected at KSh 1,115.8 billion in FY 2026/27, KSh 833.7 billion in FY 2027/28, and KSh 837.3 billion over the medium term."},{"section":"iv) Maintenance of Public debt and Obligations at a Sustainable Level"},{"p":117,"t":"iv) Maintenance of Public debt and Obligations at a Sustainable Level"},{"p":117,"t":"Kenya's public debt and obligations are assessed to be sustainable but with a high risk of debt distress. The External Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) shows that the present value (PV) of external debt to GDP stays below the 40 percent threshold over the entire projection horizon. Similarly, the PV of public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) external debt to exports is projected to  remain  under  the  180  percent  ceiling  from  2026  through  2030.  However,  debt  service pressures remain elevated. The debt service to revenue ratio exceeded the 18 percent benchmark in 2024 -2025 due to large maturities, before easing below the threshold thereafter, while the debt service to exports ratio is expected to stay above the 15 percent sustainability limit through to 2030 (Table 2)."},{"p":118,"t":"Table 2: Kenya's Public Debt Sustainability Analysis"},{"p":118,"t":"Source: The National Treasury"},{"p":118,"t":"Under  overall  public  debt,  the  Present  Value  (PV)  of  total  public  debt-to-GDP  ratio remained above the 55.0 percent benchmark (Table 3) .  The present value of public debt was 65.3 percent of GDP in 2025 and is projected to decline by 2030."},{"p":118,"t":"To enhance debt sustainability and lower the risk of debt distress, the Government will implement targeted policies to strengthen external debt indicators. These include expanding and diversifying the export base to boost foreign exchange earnings, pursuing and sustaining low single digit fiscal deficits, improving the Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) score, and maintaining adequate net international reserves to cushion against external shocks. Together, these measures will improve the external debt service to exports ratio, reduce pressure on  sustainability  thresholds,  and  strengthen  Kenya's  overall  capacity  to  manage  public  debt obligations."},{"p":118,"t":"New financing will prioritize concessional external resources to contain borrowing costs, alongside a strategic extension of the debt maturity profile through the issuance of medium to long-term  instruments.  These  actions  will  help  alleviate  near-term  debt  service  pressures, strengthen  debt  sustainability  indicators,  and  enhance  Kenya's  capacity  to  manage  future financing requirement."},{"p":118,"t":"Table 3: Kenya's External Debt Sustainability"},{"p":118,"t":"Source: The National Treasury"},{"section":"v) Prudent Management of Fiscal Risks"},{"p":118,"t":"v) Prudent Management of Fiscal Risks"},{"p":118,"t":"The  Government  continues  to  manage  fiscal  risks  prudently  across  key  domains  to safeguard overall fiscal stability. To reinforce this effort, the Fiscal Risk Committee, previously established to strengthen institutional oversight remains central in the systematic identification, assessment, and mitigation of emerging fiscal risks. First, the Government is sustaining measures to  contain  fiscal  vulnerabilities  stemming  from  public  debt,  ensuring  debt  remains  on  a sustainable  trajectory  and  does  not  exert  excessive  strain  on  the  fiscal  framework.  Second, proactive  steps  are  being  taken  to  limit  the  materialization  of  contingent  liabilities,  thereby preventing unexpected obligations from undermining fiscal commitments. Third, the"},{"p":119,"t":"Government  continues  to  monitor  and  manage  fiscal  risks  associated  with  devolution, particularly those arising from county government financial operations and obligations."},{"section":"vi) Compliance with the Requirement to Maintain a Reasonable Degree of Predictability with respect to the Level of Tax Rates and Tax Bases"},{"p":119,"t":"vi) Compliance with the Requirement to Maintain a Reasonable Degree of Predictability with respect to the Level of Tax Rates and Tax Bases"},{"p":119,"t":"9. In line with the principle of ensuring stability and predictability in both tax rates and the tax base, the National Treasury has continued to advance the rollout of the National Tax Policy. The Policy is designed to articulate a coherent framework for taxation that underpins sustainable economic growth, supports economic diversification, enhances national competitiveness, and aligns tax incentives with the Government's broader development priorities. It further aims to promote investment and safeguard fiscal flexibility by outlining revenue-mobilization measures and administrative reforms to be executed over the medium term. In addition, the Government is  sustaining  efforts  to  modernize  and  streamline  tax  legislation  to  reinforce  certainty  and strengthen compliance across the tax system. The overarching goal remains to secure adequate and stable domestic revenues while minimizing tax expenditures and fostering a predictable tax environment."},{"p":120,"t":"Annex Table 1: Macroeconomic Indicators"},{"p":120,"t":"Source: National Treasury"},{"p":121,"t":"Annex Table 2: Government Fiscal Operations, KSh Billion"},{"p":121,"t":"Source: The National Treasury"},{"p":122,"t":"Annex Table 3: Government Fiscal Operations, Percent of GDP"},{"p":122,"t":"Source: The National Treasury"},{"p":123,"t":"Annex Table 4: Summary of Expenditure by Programmes (KSh Million)"},{"p":124,"t":"Annex Table 4: Summary of Expenditure by Programmes (KSh Million) … Cont'd"},{"p":125,"t":"Annex Table 4: Summary of Expenditure by Programmes (KSh Million) … Cont'd"},{"p":126,"t":"Annex Table 4: Summary of Expenditure by Programmes (KSh Million) … Cont'd"},{"p":127,"t":"Annex Table 4: Summary of Expenditure by Programmes (KSh Million) … Cont'd"},{"p":128,"t":"Annex Table 4: Summary of Expenditure by Programmes (KSh Million) … Cont'd"},{"p":129,"t":"Annex Table 4: Summary of Expenditure by Programmes (KSh Million) … Cont'd"},{"p":130,"t":"Annex Table 4: Summary of Expenditure by Programmes (KSh Million) … Cont'd"},{"p":131,"t":"Annex Table 4: Summary of Expenditure by Programmes (KSh Million) … Cont'd"},{"p":132,"t":"Annex Table 4: Summary of Expenditure by Programmes (KSh Million) … Cont'd"},{"section":"Annex Table 5: Policy Resolutions by Parliament on Previous Budget Policy Statements"},{"p":133,"t":"Annex Table 5: Policy Resolutions by Parliament on Previous Budget Policy Statements"},{"p":133,"t":"Section 25(8) of the Public Finance Management (PFM) Act, 2012 prescribes that the Cabinet Secretary for The National Treasury shall take into account resolutions passed by Parliament in finalizing the budget for a given financial year. The National Assembly approved the 2025 Budget Policy Statement and the 2024 Budget Policy Statement on 12 th March 2025 and 7 th March 2024, respectively."},{"p":133,"t":"Section 38(1) (iii) of the PFM Act, 2012 requires the Cabinet Secretary to prepare a memorandum explaining how the resolutions adopted on the BPS have been taken into account. In this regard, the following Section provides a brief to Parliament on the extent to which the resolutions of the House on the 2025 BPS and 2024 BPS have been taken into account and the reasons thereof."},{"section":"Annex Table 6: Highlights of the Issues Raised During Public Sector Hearings"},{"p":140,"t":"Annex Table 6: Highlights of the Issues Raised During Public Sector Hearings"},{"section":"Governance Issues"},{"p":143,"t":"Governance Issues"},{"section":"Policy issues"},{"p":143,"t":"Policy issues"},{"p":143,"t":"Unfair issuance of NG-CDF bursary funds to learners"},{"p":143,"t":"Wajir TVET land encroachment"},{"p":143,"t":"Occurrence of corporal punishment cases in schools"},{"p":143,"t":"Hidden fees, tuition surcharges, and Saturday schooling"},{"p":143,"t":"Measures put in place to ensure stability, transparency and accountability in TVETs"},{"p":143,"t":"Prevalence of drug abuse across schools especially Universities"},{"p":143,"t":"Zero  absorption  of  the  Secondary  Management  Services Programme- Bursaries"},{"p":143,"t":"The Ministry negotiated with publishers and reached an agreement; books will be supplied."},{"p":143,"t":"Current contract terms are two years before confirmation; dialogue ongoing with teachers"},{"p":143,"t":"The Ministry took note and measures to ensure fairness will be put in place"},{"p":143,"t":"The  Ministry will  engage  the  County  Government,  National  Land Commission and Ministry of Internal Security to ensure that the land is fenced."},{"p":143,"t":"TSC  indicated  that  this  is  not  allowed  and  offending  teachers  are disciplined in line with TSC Code of Conduct"},{"p":143,"t":"The Ministry of Education should consider enforcing the school calendar and restrictions on illegal fees."},{"p":143,"t":"TVETs are in final phase of transitioning to the Curriculum Development, Assessment and Certification (CDAC) exam model and enhancing M&E"},{"p":143,"t":"The sector is working closely with the Ministry of Internal security and NACADA to curb the menace"},{"p":143,"t":"Ministry to investigate reasons for non-request; ensure future utilization"},{"section":"HEALTH SECTOR"},{"p":143,"t":"HEALTH SECTOR"},{"p":143,"t":"Ministry  preparedness  in  HIV  prevention  and  treatment policy, including testing, PrEP uptake, PMTCT, paediatric HIV treatment, and continuity of treatment post-donor exit."},{"p":143,"t":"Need  for  a  clear  plan  on  donor  exit  and  sustainable government substitution for HIV/AIDS, immunisation and family planning programmes."},{"p":143,"t":"Underdeveloped policy on mental health, including inadequate focus on services for men, women and children, as well as the mental health of health workers"},{"p":143,"t":"Coverage of PWDs, the elderly and the children under SHA, as  well  as  cushioning  for  the  vulnerable  cannot  afford individual contributions to SHA"},{"p":143,"t":"NHIF debt in the form of pending bills civil servants who died during COVID 19 were not compensated"},{"p":143,"t":"The  Ministry  of  Health  was  requested  to  provide  Antiretroviral  therapy support for discordant couples and ensure continuity post-donor exit. It was clarified that Key and vulnerable populations have been factored into the budget."},{"p":143,"t":"Request to increase the Mental Health budget to 5 percent of the health budget as recommended by WHO."},{"p":143,"t":"The sector clarified that Universal Health Coverage has several funds, the primary health care fund, the Emergency, and that there is an allocation of KSh  3.7  billion  under  SHA  for  the  poor  and  vulnerable  population, including persons with severe disability"},{"p":143,"t":"Total government funding through the immunisation programme is KSh 4.6 Billion and KEPI KSh 8 Billion."},{"p":147,"t":"Lack of age-sensitive courts- especially for the elderly who are  undergoing  or  have  undergone  sexual  violence  or gender-based  violence,  and  are  afraid  to  be  witnesses  for fear of victimization."},{"p":147,"t":"Corruption in public service, especially police"},{"p":147,"t":"Eroding trust in police"},{"p":147,"t":"Lack of platforms for children's voices"},{"p":147,"t":"Poor inclusion of women in governance"},{"p":147,"t":"Strategies put in place to support disarmed youth in rustling zones"},{"p":147,"t":"No  clarity  on  compensation  for  riot  victims  as  there  is duplication of roles"},{"p":147,"t":"Limited Government services in Samburu; insecurity"},{"p":147,"t":"There is a plan to come up with a one-stop shop for data on community vices such as femicide and GBV, among others, for ease of access and to inform policy and decision-making processes."},{"p":147,"t":"IEBC is engaging Parliament to reintroduce it."},{"p":147,"t":"The commission intends to undertake civic education nationwide to help restore public trust"},{"p":147,"t":"There is an ongoing effort to conduct sensitization and civic education of the citizens at the rural establishments in the Counties on sexual GBV, child abuse,  and  GBV for the  community to  be  aware of their rights  and  the proper channels of reporting of such incidents."},{"p":147,"t":"Corruption is being addressed through process automation and strengthened legal frameworks in collaboration with key oversight institutions.  There  are  proposed amendments in parliament by EACC to amend the Act to strengthen the fight against corruption."},{"p":147,"t":"There is a plan to implement community policing to engage the public on the roles of citizens and police officers, thereby bridging the disconnect between the police and the public. It is an ongoing process."},{"p":147,"t":"They  will  be  invited  to  budget-making  and  other  forums,  ensuring presentations that are child-friendly."},{"p":147,"t":"There has been a campaign for women's empowerment and the inclusion of women in governance and leadership forums, which has so far achieved greater success. It is an ongoing effort"},{"p":147,"t":"Depending on their age, Youth offered schooling, economic activities, or service roles."},{"p":147,"t":"No  overlap,  The  panel  of  experts  committee  was  set  up  to  accelerate compensation  for  victims  of  riots  and  protests  by  Panel  of  experts developing clear compensation framework. The others remain at the Victim Compensation Authority."},{"p":147,"t":"It  was  indicated  that  several  national  government  facilities  have  been established in Samburu County to serve County residents, including police services."},{"p":150,"t":"●"},{"p":150,"t":"It  was  clarified  that  the  NG-CDF  Act  does  not  give  specify  on  which agency should run the fund"},{"p":152,"t":"Annex Table 7: Public Proposals and Comments on the 2026 Budget Policy Statement"},{"p":178,"t":"THE NATIONAL TREASURY FEBRUARY 2026"},{"table_page":42,"section":"2.1 Global Economic Outlook","markdown":"| Economy                           | Growth (%).Actual.2024   |   Growth (%).Estimate.2025 |   Growth (%).Projections.2026 |   Growth (%).Projections.2027 |\n|:----------------------------------|:-------------------------|---------------------------:|------------------------------:|------------------------------:|\n| World                             | 3.3                      |                        3.3 |                           3.3 |                           3.2 |\n| Advanced Economies                | 1.8                      |                        1.7 |                           1.8 |                           1.7 |\n| Of which: USA                     | 2.8                      |                        2.1 |                           2.4 |                           2   |\n| Euro Area                         | 0.9                      |                        1.4 |                           1.3 |                           1.4 |\n| Japan                             | (0.2)                    |                        1.1 |                           0.7 |                           0.6 |\n| Emerging and Developing Economies | 4.3                      |                        4.4 |                           4.2 |                           4.1 |\n| Of which: China                   | 5.0                      |                        5   |                           4.5 |                           4   |\n| India                             | 6.5                      |                        7.3 |                           6.4 |                           6.4 |\n| Sub-Saharan Africa                | 4.1                      |                        4.4 |                           4.6 |                           4.6 |\n| Of which: South Africa            | 0.5                      |                        1.3 |                           1.4 |                           1.5 |\n| Nigeria                           | 4.1                      |                        4.2 |                           4.4 |                           4.1 |"},{"table_page":43,"section":"2.2 Domestic Economic Performance","markdown":"| Sectors/Sub-sectors.                             | Quartely Growth Rates.2024 QI   | Quartely Growth Rates.2024 Q2   | Quartely Growth Rates.2024 Q3   |   Quartely Growth Rates.2025 QI |   Quartely Growth Rates.2025 Q2 |   Quartely Growth Rates.2025 Q3 |\n|:-------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------|:--------------------------------|:--------------------------------|--------------------------------:|--------------------------------:|--------------------------------:|\n| 1 Primary sector                                 |                                 | 4.0                             | 2.9                             |                             6.2 |                             4.9 |                             4   |\n| 1.1. Agriculture; Forestry and Fishing           | 5.6                             | 4.5                             | 4.0                             |                             6   |                             4.4 |                             3.2 |\n| 1.2                                              | (16.1)                          | (5.5)                           | (12.2)                          |                            10.8 |                            15.3 |                            16.6 |\n| 2. Secondary Sector (Industry)                   | 15                              | 0.5                             | 0.3                             |                             2.6 |                             3.3 |                             4.1 |\n| 2.1. Manufacturing                               | 1.9                             | 3.2                             | 2.3                             |                             2.1 |                             1   |                             2.5 |\n| 2.2. Electricity and Water supply                | 2.8                             | 1.2                             | 0.9                             |                             3.6 |                             5.7 |                             3.6 |\n| 2.3. Construction                                | 0.4                             | (3.7)                           | (2.6)                           |                             3   |                             5.7 |                             6.7 |\n| 3. Tertiary sector (Services)                    | 6.8                             | 6.2                             | 5.7                             |                             4.8 |                             5.5 |                             5.4 |\n| 3.1. Wholesale and Retail trade                  | 3.6                             | 2.5                             | 2.6                             |                             5.4 |                             4.1 |                             4.8 |\n| 3.2. Accomodation and Restaurant                 | 38.1                            | 35.0                            | 22.9                            |                             4.1 |                             7.8 |                            17.7 |\n| 3.3. Transport and Storage                       | 4.1                             | 3.4                             | 4.6                             |                             3.7 |                             5.4 |                             5.2 |\n| 3.4. Information and Communication               | 9.2                             | 6.7                             | 6.9                             |                             5.8 |                             6   |                             4.5 |\n| 3.5. Financial and Insurance                     | 9.6                             | 8.0                             | 7.3                             |                             5.2 |                             6.7 |                             5.4 |\n| 3.6. Public Administration                       | 7.5                             | 9.0                             | 7.3                             |                             6.5 |                             6   |                             5.1 |\n| 3.7. Others                                      | 5.8                             | 5.6                             | 4.9                             |                             4.4 |                             5.2 |                             5.2 |\n| of which: Professional, Admin & Support Services | 9.4                             | 6.7                             | 4.5                             |                             4.6 |                             8.5 |                             6.1 |\n| Real Estate                                      | 6.9                             | 5.9                             | 4.8                             |                             5.3 |                             5.5 |                             5.7 |\n| Education                                        | 2.4                             | 3.2                             | 4.8                             |                             2.9 |                             3.2 |                             3.4 |\n| Health                                           | 5.4                             | 8.1                             | 6.2                             |                             4.8 |                             6.8 |                             4.1 |\n| Taxes less subsidies                             | 2.9                             | 3.8                             | 6.3                             |                             5.7 |                             3.3 |                             3.7 |\n| Real GDP                                         | 4.9                             | 4.6                             | 4.2                             |                             4.9 |                             5   |                             4.9 |"},{"table_page":47,"section":"Monetary and Credit Developments","markdown":"|                                         | 2023 December   | 2024 December   | 2025 December   | Absolute Change.2023-2024 December   | Absolute Change.2024-2025 December   | Percent Change.2023-2024 December   | Percent Change.2024-2025 December   |\n|:----------------------------------------|:----------------|:----------------|:----------------|:-------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:------------------------------------|:------------------------------------|\n| COMPONENTS OF M3                        |                 |                 |                 |                                      |                                      |                                     |                                     |\n| supply, MI (1.1+1.2+1.3) Moncy          |                 | 2,121.4         | 2,406.0         | 77.3                                 | 284.6                                | 3.8                                 | 13.4                                |\n| 1.1 currency outside banks (MO)         | 282./           | 292.8           | 323.2           | 10.7                                 | 30.4                                 | 3.8                                 | 10.4                                |\n| 1.2 Demand deposits                     | 1,663.9         | 1,714.5         | 1,970.0         | 50.6                                 | 255.5                                | 3.0                                 | 14.9                                |\n| 1.3 Other deposits at CBK               | 98.0            | 114.1           | 112.8           | 16.1                                 |                                      | 16.4                                |                                     |\n| supply; M2 (1+2.1) Money                | 3,952.3         | 4,231.3         | 4,682.7         | 279.0                                | 451.3                                | 71                                  |                                     |\n| 2.1 Time and savings dcposits           | 1,908.3         | 2,109.9         | 2,276.7         | 201.7                                | 166.7                                | 10.6                                | 7.9                                 |\n| Money supply, M3 (2+3.1)                | 5,498.6         | 5,488.7         | 6,029.3         | (9.8)                                | 540.6                                | (0.2)                               | 9.8                                 |\n| 3.1 Foreign currency deposits           | 1.546.3         | 1,257.4         | 1.346.7         | (288.8                               | 89.3                                 | (18.7)                              | 71                                  |\n| ISOURCES OF M3                          |                 |                 |                 |                                      |                                      |                                     |                                     |\n| 1. Net foreign assets (1.1+1.2)         | 793.6           | 841.7           |                 | 48.1                                 | 342.2                                | 6.1                                 | 40.7                                |\n| 1.1 Central Bank                        | 486.9           | 610.1           | 892.5           | 123.3                                | 282.4                                | 25.3                                | 46.3                                |\n| 1.2 Banking Institutions                | 306.7           | 231.5           | 291.4           | (75.2)                               | 59.8                                 | (24.5)                              | 25.8                                |\n| 2. Net domestic assets (2.1+2.2)        | 4,705.0         | 4,647.1         | 4,845.4         | (57.9)                               | 198.4                                | (1.2)                               | 4.3                                 |\n| 2.1 Domcstic credit (2.1.1+2.1.2+2.1.3) | 6,252.0         | 5,909.0         | 6,429.8         |                                      | 520.9                                | (5.5)                               | 8.8                                 |\n| 2.1.1 Government (net)                  | 2,239.5         | 1,984.2         | 2,289.6         | (255.3)                              | 305.4                                | (11.4)                              | 15.4                                |\n| 2.1.2 Other scctor public               | 101.3           | 67.1            | 54.5            | (34.2)                               | (12.6)                               | (33.8)                              | (18.8)                              |\n| 2.1.3 Private sector                    | 3,911.2         | 3,857.7         | 4,085.8         | (53.5)                               | 228.1                                | (1.4)                               |                                     |\n| 2.2 Other assets net                    | (1,547.0)       | (1,261.9)       | (1,584.4)       | 285.1                                | (322.5)                              | 18.4                                | (25.6)                              |"},{"table_page":49,"section":"External Sector Developments","markdown":"|                            | Dec-23    | Dec-24    | Dec-25     | Year to December 2025.Absolute Change   | Year to December 2025.Percent Change   | Actuals as a Percent of GDP.Dec-24   | Actuals as a Percent of GDP.Dec-25   |\n|:---------------------------|:----------|:----------|:-----------|:----------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|\n| Overall Balance            | 1,008.1   | (1,458.7) | (1,868.3)  | (409.6)                                 | (28.1)                                 | (1.2)                                | (1.3)                                |\n| Current Account            | (2,728.4) | (1,550.6) | (3,298.9)  | (1,748.3)                               | (112.8)                                | (1.2)                                | (2.4)                                |\n| Merchandise Account (a-b)  | (9,556.4) | (9,734.2) | (10,995.3) | (1,261.1)                               | (13.0)                                 | (7.8)                                | (7.9)                                |\n| a) Goods: exports          | 11,031.3  | 12,507.9  | 13,266.1   | 758.1                                   | 6.1                                    | 10.0                                 | 9.5                                  |\n| b) Goods: imports          | 20,587.8  | 22,242.1  | 24,261.3   | 2,019.2                                 | 9.1                                    | 17.7                                 | 17.3                                 |\n| Net Services (c-d)         | 1,703.4   | 2,416.1   | 2,100.9    | (315.2)                                 | (13.0)                                 | 1.9                                  | 1.5                                  |\n| Services: credit           | 7,149.2   | 8,077.6   | 8,168.3    | 90.6                                    | 1.1                                    | 6.4                                  | 5.8                                  |\n| Services: debit            | 5,445.8   | 5,661.5   | 6,067.4    | 405.9                                   | 7.2                                    | 4.5                                  | 4.3                                  |\n| Net Primary Income (e-f)   | (1,861.1) | (1,845.5) | (1,798.7)  | 46.8                                    | 2.5                                    | (1.5)                                | (1.3)                                |\n| Primary income: credit     | 182.3     | 291.7     | 401.1      | 109.4                                   | 37.5                                   | 0.2                                  | 0.3                                  |\n| f) Primary income: debit   | 2,043.5   | 2,137.2   | 2,199.8    | 62.6                                    | 2.9                                    | 1.7                                  | 1.6                                  |\n| Net Secondary Income       | 6,985.8   | 7,613.0   | 7,394.1    | (218.8)                                 | (2.9)                                  | 6.1                                  | 5.3                                  |\n| g Secondary income: credit | 7,079.0   | 7,662.1   | 7,459.7    | (202.4)                                 | (2.6)                                  | 6.1                                  | 5.3                                  |\n| of which Remittances       | 4,189.9   | 4,945.2   | 5,036.8    | 91.5                                    | 1.9                                    | 3.9                                  | 3.6                                  |\n| h) Secondary income: debit | 93.3      |           | 65.5       | 16.4                                    | 33.5                                   | 0.0                                  | 0.0                                  |\n| B) Capital Account         | 127.6     | 232.2     | 180.7      | (51.5)                                  | (22.2)                                 | 0.2                                  | 0.1                                  |\n| C) Financial Account       | (1,847.0) | (3,213.6) | (,266.7)   | (2,053.1)                               | (63.9)                                 | (2.6)                                | (3.8)                                |"},{"table_page":52,"section":"Revenue Performance","markdown":"|                                              | Dec-24.Billion).   | Dec-24.% of.GDP   | Dec-24..   | Dec-25.KSh Billion.   | Dec-25.KSh Billion.Prel Act.   | Dec-25.KSh Billion.Deviation   | Dec-25.% of GDP.   | Dec-25.% of GDP.[Target_ PreL Act   | Dec-25.% Growth.% Growth   |\n|:---------------------------------------------|:-------------------|:------------------|:-----------|:----------------------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------|:------------------------------------|:---------------------------|\n| A Total Revenue including External Grants    | 1,342.2            |                   | 1.8        | 1,654.6               | 1,506.3                        | (148.3)                        | 8.6                | 7.8                                 | 12.2                       |\n| Iotal Revenues (1+2)                         | 1,334.7            |                   | 1.6        | 1,636.7               | 1,500.6                        | (136.1)|                       | 85                 | 1.8                                 | 124                        |\n| 1 Ordinary Revenue                           | 1,157.8            | 6.4               | 6.3        | 1,351.9               | 1,2363                         | (115.3)|                       | 7.0                | 6.4                                 | 6.8                        |\n| Import duty                                  | 715                | 0.4               | 4.8        | 83.7                  | 84.7                           | 10                             | 0.4                | 0.4                                 | 18.4                       |\n| Excise duty                                  | 1413               | 0.8               | 11         | 167.6                 | 153.6                          | (14.o)/                        | 0.9                | 0.8                                 | 8.7                        |\n| Income tax                                   | 530.8              | 29                | 8.1        | 626.9                 | 542.4                          | (84.5)                         | 33                 | 2.8                                 | 2.2                        |\n| VAT                                          | 304.1              | 17                | (4.4)      | 379.4                 | 351.0                          |                                | 2.0                | 18                                  | 15.4                       |\n| Other Revenue                                | 110.0              | 0.6               | 54.0       | 94.3                  | 104.8                          | 103                            | 05                 |                                     | (4.7                       |\n| 2 Ministerial Appropriation n Aid            | 176.9              | 10                |            | 284.9                 | 264.1                          | (20.8)                         | 13                 | 14                                  | 49.2                       |\n| 3.External Grants                            |                    | 0.0               | 317        | 17.9                  | 5.8                            | (12.2/                         | 0.1                | 0.0                                 | (23.3)                     |\n| [B. Total Expenditure and Net Lending        | 1,795.8            | 9.9               | 5.3        | 2,097.0               | 2,024.4                        | (72.6)                         | 10.9               | 10.5                                | 12,7                       |\n| 1. Recurrent Expenditure                     | 1,372.1            | 7.6               | 59         | 1,5413                | 1,552.2                        | 10.9                           | 8.0                | 8.1                                 | 13.1                       |\n| 2 Development                                | 232.0              | 13                | (12.7/     | 325.7                 | 292.7                          |                                | 17                 |                                     | 26.1                       |\n| 3 County Allocation                          | 191.6              | 11                | 343        | 229.9                 | 1795                           | (50.4/                         | 12                 | 0.9                                 |                            |\n| 4 Contigency Fund                            |                    |                   |            |                       |                                |                                |                    |                                     |                            |\n| IC. Balance Exclusive of Grants              | (464.0)            | (2.6)             | 18.6       | (460.3)               | (523.8)                        | (63.6)                         | (2.4)              | (2.7)                               | 12.9                       |\n| JD. Balance inclusive of Grants (Cash basis) | (456.5|            | (2.5)             | 123.5      | (442.4)               | (518.1)                        | (75.7)                         | (2.3)              | (2.7)                               | 135                        |\n| Discrepancy                                  | (519|              | (0.3)             | 1315       |                       | (1.l)                          |                                |                    |                                     | (97.9)                     |\n| E. Total Financing                           | 404.6              | 2.2               | 122.5      | 442,4                 | 517.0                          | 74.7                           | 23                 |                                     | 27.8                       |\n| 1 Net Foreign Fnancing                       | (6.6)              |                   |            | (43.2)                | 7.8                            | 51.0                           | (0.2)              | 0.0                                 | (217.1)                    |\n| 2 Net Domestic Fnancing                      | 411.2              |                   | 95.8       | 485.6                 | 509.2                          | 23.6                           | 25                 |                                     | 23.8                       |\n| [Nominal GDP (Fiscal Year)                   | 18,054.3           |                   |            |                       | 19,272.8                       |                                |                    |                                     |                            |"},{"table_page":53,"section":"2.4 Kenya's Macroeconomic Policy Outlook","markdown":"|                                                       | 2023.Act.                                             | 2024.Act.                                             | 2025.Est.                                             | 2026.Proj                                             | 2027.Proj.                                            | 2028.Proj.                                            | 2029.Proj.                                            | 2030.Proj.                                            |\n|:------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------|\n| annual percentage change; unless othenwvise indicated | annual percentage change; unless othenwvise indicated | annual percentage change; unless othenwvise indicated | annual percentage change; unless othenwvise indicated | annual percentage change; unless othenwvise indicated | annual percentage change; unless othenwvise indicated | annual percentage change; unless othenwvise indicated | annual percentage change; unless othenwvise indicated | annual percentage change; unless othenwvise indicated |\n| National Account and Prices                           |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |\n| Real GDP                                              | 5.7                                                   |                                                       | 5.0                                                   | 5.3                                                   | 5.3                                                   | 5.3                                                   | 5.3                                                   | 5.3                                                   |\n| Primary Sector                                        | 5.7                                                   | 3.8                                                   | 5.0                                                   | 5.0                                                   | 4.7                                                   | 4.8                                                   | 4.7                                                   | 4.9                                                   |\n| of which: Agricuture                                  |                                                       | 4.6                                                   | 4.6                                                   | 4.7                                                   | 4.5                                                   | 4.5                                                   | 4.4                                                   | 4.5                                                   |\n| Secondary Sector                                      | 2.6                                                   | 15                                                    | 3.5                                                   | 3.9                                                   | 3.9                                                   | 4.3                                                   | 4.5                                                   | 4.9                                                   |\n| Tertiary Sector                                       | 6.8                                                   | 6.1                                                   | 5.3                                                   | 6.0                                                   | 6.0                                                   | 6.1                                                   | 6.1                                                   | 6.0                                                   |\n| GDP deflator                                          | 5.9                                                   | 2.5                                                   | 6.0                                                   | 4.9                                                   | 4.6                                                   | 4.7                                                   | 4.7                                                   | 4.5                                                   |\n| CPI Index (eop)                                       | 6.6                                                   | 4.5                                                   | 4.5                                                   | 5.0                                                   | 4.9                                                   | 4.7                                                   | 4.7                                                   | 4.9                                                   |\n| CPI Index (avg                                        | 7.7                                                   | 4.5                                                   | 4.1                                                   | 5.0                                                   | 5.0                                                   | 4.7                                                   | 4.7                                                   | 4.7                                                   |\n| Ters of trade ~deterioration)                         |                                                       | -0.4                                                  | 3.8                                                   | 2.3                                                   | 3.2                                                   | 3.2                                                   | 3.8                                                   | 3.8                                                   |\n| Exchange Rate (Ksh/USS. average)                      |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |\n| Money and Credit (end of period)                      |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |\n| Net domestic assets                                   | 3.1                                                   | 9.0                                                   | 10.7                                                  | 8.8                                                   | 8.5                                                   | 8.6                                                   | 9.2                                                   | 8.0                                                   |\n| Net domestic credit to the Government                 | 14.2                                                  | 13.8                                                  | 8.3                                                   | 6.2                                                   | 5.0                                                   | 5.5                                                   | 5.7                                                   | 2.8                                                   |\n| Credit to the rest of the economy                     | 3.1                                                   | 3.9                                                   | 7.0                                                   | 9.3                                                   | 9.8                                                   | 9.7                                                   | 10.4                                                  | 1.7                                                   |\n| Broad Money. M3 (percent change)                      | 7.2                                                   | 9.2                                                   | 10.5                                                  | 10.2                                                  | 10.2                                                  | 10.2                                                  | 10.3                                                  | 7.6                                                   |\n| Reserve money (percent change)                        | 7.9                                                   | 3.5                                                   | 9.3                                                   | 10.1                                                  | 10.1                                                  | 10.1                                                  | 10.1                                                  | 7.5                                                   |\n| in percentage of GDP , unless othenwise indicated     | in percentage of GDP , unless othenwise indicated     | in percentage of GDP , unless othenwise indicated     | in percentage of GDP , unless othenwise indicated     | in percentage of GDP , unless othenwise indicated     | in percentage of GDP , unless othenwise indicated     | in percentage of GDP , unless othenwise indicated     | in percentage of GDP , unless othenwise indicated     | in percentage of GDP , unless othenwise indicated     |\n| Investment and Saving                                 |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |\n| Consumption                                           | 89.2                                                  | 88.8                                                  | 89.3                                                  | 88.7                                                  | 88.4                                                  | 87.9                                                  | 87.7                                                  | 87.2                                                  |\n| Central Governent                                     | 11.8                                                  | 11.2                                                  | 11.6                                                  | 11.2                                                  | 11.0                                                  | 10.6                                                  | 10.3                                                  | 9.9                                                   |\n| Private                                               | 76.2                                                  | 76.9                                                  | 77.1                                                  | 76.9                                                  | 76.9                                                  | 76.9                                                  | 76.9                                                  | 76.9                                                  |\n| Final consumption expenditure by NPISH                | 0.7                                                   | 0.7                                                   | 0.6                                                   | 0.5                                                   | 0.5                                                   | 0.4                                                   | 0.4                                                   | 0.4                                                   |\n| Gross Fixed Capital Investment                        | 16.5                                                  | 16.8                                                  | 14.6                                                  | 15.4                                                  | 15.5                                                  | 15.6                                                  | 15.7                                                  | 15.7                                                  |\n| Central Government                                    | 4.2                                                   | 4.2                                                   | 4.2                                                   | 4.3                                                   | 4.4                                                   | 4.6                                                   | 4.6                                                   | 4.7                                                   |\n| Private                                               | 12.3                                                  | 12.6                                                  | 10.4                                                  | 11.2                                                  | 11.2                                                  | 1.1                                                   | 1l.1                                                  | 11.0                                                  |\n| Gross National Saving                                 | 12.3                                                  | 14.1                                                  | 13.3                                                  | 13.1                                                  | 13.2                                                  | 13.3                                                  | 13.4                                                  | 13.4                                                  |\n| Central Government                                    | 0.4                                                   | 0.1                                                   | -0.1                                                  | 0.1                                                   | 0.3                                                   | 19                                                    | 2.3                                                   | 2.3                                                   |\n| Private                                               | 11.9                                                  | 13.9                                                  | 13.4                                                  | 13.0                                                  | 12.9                                                  | 11.4                                                  | Il.l                                                  | Il.l                                                  |\n| Exports value; goods and services                     | 16.8                                                  | 17.0                                                  | 15.3                                                  | 14.6                                                  | 14.2                                                  | 14.0                                                  | 13.9                                                  | 13.5                                                  |\n| Imports value; goods and services                     | 24.3                                                  | 23.1                                                  | 21.8                                                  | 20.7                                                  | 20.0                                                  | 19.5                                                  | 18.7                                                  | 18.2                                                  |\n| Curent Account Balance                                |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |\n| Gross reserves   in months of next yr's imports       | 3.1                                                   | 4.0                                                   | 4.4                                                   | 4.4                                                   | 4.5                                                   | 4.6                                                   | 4.7                                                   | 4.9                                                   |\n| Gross reserves in months of this yr's imports         | 3.4                                                   | 4.3                                                   | 4.6                                                   | 4.7                                                   | 4.8                                                   | 4.9                                                   | 5.0                                                   | 5.1                                                   |\n| Central Government Budget in Fiscal Years             |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |\n| Iotal revenue                                         | 16.5                                                  | 17.3                                                  | 17.1                                                  | 17.6                                                  | 16.9                                                  | 17.5                                                  | 17.0                                                  | 16.8                                                  |\n| Total Expenditure and Net Lending                     | 22.5                                                  | 23.0                                                  | 23.2                                                  | 23.9                                                  | 22.5                                                  | 21.4                                                  | 20.6                                                  | 20.2                                                  |\n| Overall Fiscal Balance excl. Grants                   |                                                       |                                                       | -6.1                                                  | -6.2                                                  |                                                       |                                                       | -3.6                                                  |                                                       |\n| Overall Fiscal Balance incl. Grants                   | -5.9                                                  | -5.6                                                  |                                                       | -6.0                                                  |                                                       | -3.6                                                  | -3.3                                                  | -3.2                                                  |\n| Statistical discrepancy                               |                                                       | -0.1                                                  | 0.1                                                   | 0.0                                                   | 0.0                                                   | 0.0                                                   | 0.0                                                   | 0.0                                                   |\n|                                                       | -5.6                                                  |                                                       | 45.9                                                  | -6.0                                                  |                                                       | -3.6                                                  | -3.3                                                  | -3.2                                                  |\n| Primay Budget Balance                                 | -0.8                                                  | 0.1                                                   | -0.2                                                  | -0.1                                                  | 0.4                                                   | 1.6                                                   | 1.6                                                   | 1.4                                                   |\n| Net domestic borrowing                                | 3.2                                                   | 3.8                                                   | 5.0                                                   | 4.7                                                   | 4.3                                                   | 2.4                                                   | 2.7                                                   | 2.6                                                   |\n| Public debt in Fiscal years                           |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |                                                       |\n| Nominal Government Public Debt (eop). Gross           | 71.9                                                  | 67.5                                                  | 68.9                                                  | 68.2                                                  | 67.2                                                  | 64.6                                                  | 61.8                                                  | 59.3                                                  |\n| Nominal Public Debt (eop) Net of Deposits             | 68.5                                                  | 64.2                                                  | 65.4                                                  | 65.0                                                  | 64.3                                                  | 62.0                                                  | 59.5                                                  | 57.2                                                  |\n| Domestic (Gross) Debt                                 | 33.8                                                  | 34.5                                                  | 36.9                                                  | 38.0                                                  | 38.7                                                  |                                                       | 36.7                                                  | 35.9                                                  |\n| Domestic (Net) Debt                                   | 30.4                                                  | 31.2                                                  | 33.5                                                  | 34.8                                                  | 35.9                                                  | 34.9                                                  | 34.4                                                  | 33.8                                                  |\n| External Debt                                         | 38.1                                                  | 33.0                                                  | 32.0                                                  | 30.2                                                  | 28.5                                                  | 27.1                                                  | 25.2                                                  | 23.4                                                  |"},{"table_page":57,"section":"2.4.2 Fiscal Policy and Outlook","markdown":"|                                              | FY2023/24.Actual      | FY2024/25.Prel.       | FY2025/26.Budget      | FY2025/26.Proj.       | FY2026/27 FY2027/28 FY2028/29 FY2029/30.BPS Projections   | FY2026/27 FY2027/28 FY2028/29 FY2029/30.BPS Projections   | FY2026/27 FY2027/28 FY2028/29 FY2029/30.BPS Projections   | FY2026/27 FY2027/28 FY2028/29 FY2029/30.BPS Projections   |\n|:---------------------------------------------|:----------------------|:----------------------|:----------------------|:----------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------|\n| Amount in KSh Billion                        | Amount in KSh Billion | Amount in KSh Billion | Amount in KSh Billion | Amount in KSh Billion | Amount in KSh Billion                                     | Amount in KSh Billion                                     | Amount in KSh Billion                                     | Amount in KSh Billion                                     |\n| TOTALREVENUE                                 | 2,702.7               | 2,923.6               | 3,321.7               | 3,352.1               | 3,533.7                                                   | 4,038.9                                                   | 4,337.2                                                   | 4,699.5                                                   |\n| Ordinary revenue                             | 2,288.9               | 2,420.2               | 2,754.7               | 2,744.4               | 2,901.9                                                   | 3,390.0                                                   | 3,658.0                                                   | 3,957.6                                                   |\n| Tax Revenue                                  | 2,167.8               | 2,272.4               | 2,627.1               | 2,600.8               | 2,767.4                                                   | 3,099.0                                                   | 3,374.0                                                   | 3,705.5                                                   |\n| NonTaxRevenue                                | 121.1                 | 147.8                 | 127.6                 | 143.6                 | 134.5                                                     | 291.1                                                     | 284.0                                                     | 252.1                                                     |\n| Ministerial Appropriation in Aid             | 413.7                 | 503.4                 | 566.9                 | 607.7                 | 631.8                                                     | 648.9                                                     | 679.2                                                     | 741.8                                                     |\n| TOTALEXPENDITUREAND NETLENDING               | 3,605.2               | 3,975.9               | 4,269.9               | 4,532.8               | 4,703.9                                                   | 4,931.4                                                   | 5,241.6                                                   | 5,662.3                                                   |\n| Recurrent                                    | 2,678.4               | 2,948.4               | 3,134.1               | 3,338.7               | 3,456.9                                                   | 3,569.0                                                   | 3,712.3                                                   | 4,018.3                                                   |\n| Development                                  | 546.4                 | 582.9                 | 649.0                 | 707.3                 | 749.5                                                     | 883.8                                                     | 1,041.2                                                   | 1,129.7                                                   |\n| County Transfer                              | 380.4                 | 444.6                 | 484.8                 | 484.8                 | 495.5                                                     | 473.5                                                     | 483.0                                                     | 509.4                                                     |\n| Contigency Fund                              | -                     | -                     | 2.0                   | 2.0                   | 2.0                                                       | 5.0                                                       | 5.0                                                       | 5.0                                                       |\n| BALANCEEXCLUDINGGRANTS                       | (902.5)               | (1,052.4)             | (948.2)               | (1,180.7)             | (1,170.2)                                                 | (892.5)                                                   | (904.4)                                                   | (962.9)                                                   |\n| Grants                                       | 22.0                  | 33.3                  | 47.2                  | 39.9                  | 54.4                                                      | 58.8                                                      | 67.1                                                      | 77.1                                                      |\n| BALANCEINCLUSIVEOFGRANTS                     | (880.5)               | (1,019.1)             | (901.0)               | (1,140.7)             | (1,115.8)                                                 | (833.7)                                                   | (837.3)                                                   | (885.8)                                                   |\n| Adjustment to cash basis                     | 45.4                  | -                     | -                     | -                     | -                                                         | -                                                         | -                                                         | -                                                         |\n| BALANCEINCLUSIVEOFGRANTS(cashbasis)          | (835.1)               | (1,019.1)             | (901.0)               | (1,140.7)             | (1,115.8)                                                 | (833.7)                                                   | (837.3)                                                   | (885.8)                                                   |\n| Discrepancy                                  | (16.8)                | 15.1                  | -                     | -                     | -                                                         | -                                                         | -                                                         | -                                                         |\n| TOTALFINANCING                               | 818.3                 | 1,034.2               | 901.0                 | 1,140.7               | 1,115.8                                                   | 833.7                                                     | 837.3                                                     | 885.8                                                     |\n| Net Foreign Financing                        | 222.7                 | 179.7                 | 287.4                 | 254.8                 | 225.5                                                     | 287.8                                                     | 153.3                                                     | 148.3                                                     |\n| Net Domestic Financing                       | 595.6                 | 854.5                 | 613.5                 | 885.9                 | 890.4                                                     | 545.9                                                     | 684.0                                                     | 737.4                                                     |\n| Nominal GDP(Fiscal year)                     | 15,666.6              | 17,144.0              | 19,272.8              | 19,003.2              | 20,947.4                                                  | 23,081.7                                                  | 25,446.8                                                  | 28,024.3                                                  |\n| As a share ofGDP                             | As a share ofGDP      | As a share ofGDP      | As a share ofGDP      | As a share ofGDP      | As a share ofGDP                                          | As a share ofGDP                                          | As a share ofGDP                                          | As a share ofGDP                                          |\n| TOTALREVENUE                                 | 17.3                  | 17.1                  | 17.2                  | 17.6                  | 16.9                                                      | 17.5                                                      | 17.0                                                      | 16.8                                                      |\n| Ordinary revenue                             | 14.6                  | 14.1                  | 14.3                  | 14.4                  | 13.9                                                      | 14.7                                                      | 14.4                                                      | 14.1                                                      |\n| Tax Revenue                                  | 13.8                  | 13.3                  | 13.6                  | 13.7                  | 13.2                                                      | 13.4                                                      | 13.3                                                      | 13.2                                                      |\n| NonTaxRevenue                                | 0.8                   | 0.9                   | 0.7                   | 0.8                   | 0.6                                                       | 1.3                                                       | 1.1                                                       | 0.9                                                       |\n| Ministerial Appropriation in Aid             | 2.6                   | 2.9                   | 2.9                   | 3.2                   | 3.0                                                       | 2.8                                                       | 2.7                                                       | 2.6                                                       |\n|                                              | -                     | -                     | -                     | -                     | -                                                         | -                                                         | -                                                         | -                                                         |\n| TOTALEXPENDITUREAND NETLENDING               | 23.0                  | 23.2                  | 22.2                  | 23.9                  | 22.5                                                      | 21.4                                                      | 20.6                                                      | 20.2                                                      |\n| Recurrent                                    | 17.1                  | 17.2                  | 16.3                  | 17.6                  | 16.5                                                      | 15.5                                                      | 14.6                                                      | 14.3                                                      |\n| Development                                  | 3.5                   | 3.4                   | 3.4                   | 3.7                   | 3.6                                                       | 3.8                                                       | 4.1                                                       | 4.0                                                       |\n| County Transfer                              | 2.4                   | 2.6                   | 2.5                   | 2.6                   | 2.4                                                       | 2.1                                                       | 1.9                                                       | 1.8                                                       |\n| Contigency Fund                              | -                     | -                     | 0.0                   | 0.0                   | 0.0                                                       | 0.0                                                       | 0.0                                                       | 0.0                                                       |\n|                                              | -                     | -                     | -                     | -                     | -                                                         | -                                                         | -                                                         | -                                                         |\n| BALANCEEXCLUDINGGRANTS                       | (5.8)                 | (6.1)                 | (4.9)                 | (6.2)                 | (5.6)                                                     | (3.9)                                                     | (3.6)                                                     | (3.4)                                                     |\n| Grants                                       | 0.1                   | 0.2                   | 0.2                   | 0.2                   | 0.3                                                       | 0.3                                                       | 0.3                                                       | 0.3                                                       |\n| BALANCEINCLUSIVEOFGRANTS                     | (5.6)                 | (5.9)                 | (4.7)                 | (6.0)                 | (5.3)                                                     | (3.6)                                                     | (3.3)                                                     | (3.2)                                                     |\n| Adjustment to cash basis                     | 0.3                   | -                     | -                     | -                     | -                                                         | -                                                         | -                                                         | -                                                         |\n| BALANCEINCLUSIVEOFGRANTS(cashbasis)          | (5.3)                 | (5.9)                 | (4.7)                 | (6.0)                 | (5.3)                                                     | (3.6)                                                     | (3.3)                                                     | (3.2)                                                     |\n| Discrepancy                                  | (0.1)                 | 0.1                   | -                     | -                     |                                                           | -                                                         | -                                                         | -                                                         |\n| TOTALFINANCING                               | 5.2                   |                       | 4.7                   |                       | -                                                         |                                                           | 3.3                                                       | 3.2                                                       |\n|                                              |                       | 6.0                   |                       | 6.0                   | 5.3                                                       | 3.6                                                       |                                                           | 0.5                                                       |\n| Net Foreign Financing Net Domestic Financing | 1.4 3.8               | 1.0 5.0               | 1.5 3.2               | 1.3 4.7               | 1.1 4.3                                                   | 1.2                                                       | 0.6                                                       | 2.6                                                       |\n| Nominal GDP(Fiscal year)                     | 100.0                 | 100.0                 | 100.0                 | 100.0                 | 100.0                                                     | 2.4 100.0                                                 | 2.7 100.0                                                 | 100.0                                                     |"},{"table_page":57,"section":"Revenue Projections versus Nominal GDP Growth Rates","markdown":"|                  | FY 2021/22 Act..Amount in KSh Billions   | FY 2022/23 Act.Amount in KSh Billions   | FY 2023/24 Act..Amount in KSh Billions   | FY 2024/25 Prel..Amount in KSh Billions   | FY 2025/26 Proj..Amount in KSh Billions   | FY 2026/27 Proj..Amount in KSh Billions   | FY 2027/28 Proj..Amount in KSh Billions   | FY 2028/29 Proj..Amount in KSh Billions   | FY 2029/30 Proj..Amount in KSh Billions   |\n|:-----------------|:-----------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|\n| Total Revenue    | 2,200                                    | 2,361                                   | 2,703                                    | 2,924                                     | 3,352                                     | 3,534                                     | 4,039                                     | 4,337                                     | 4,699                                     |\n| Ordinary Revenue | 1,918                                    | 2,041                                   | 2,289                                    | 2,420                                     | 2,744                                     | 2,902                                     | 3,390                                     | 3,658                                     | 3,958                                     |\n| Nominal GDP      | 12,759                                   | 14,299                                  | 15,667                                   | 17,144                                    | 19,003                                    | 20,947                                    | 23,082                                    | 25,447                                    | 28,024                                    |\n|                  | Annual Growth Rates                      | Annual Growth Rates                     | Annual Growth Rates                      | Annual Growth Rates                       | Annual Growth Rates                       | Annual Growth Rates                       | Annual Growth Rates                       | Annual Growth Rates                       | Annual Growth Rates                       |\n| Total Revenue    | 22.0                                     | 7.3                                     | 14.5                                     | 8.2                                       | 14.7                                      | 5.4                                       | 14.3                                      | 7.4                                       | 8.4                                       |\n| Ordinary Revenue | 22.8                                     | 6.4                                     | 12.1                                     | 5.7                                       | 13.4                                      | 5.7                                       | 16.8                                      | 7.9                                       | 8.2                                       |\n| Nominal GDP      | 13.3                                     | 12.1                                    | 9.6                                      | 9.4                                       | 10.8                                      | 10.2                                      | 10.2                                      | 10.2                                      | 10.1                                      |\n|                  | Percent of GDP                           | Percent of GDP                          | Percent of GDP                           | Percent of GDP                            | Percent of GDP                            | Percent of GDP                            | Percent of GDP                            | Percent of GDP                            | Percent of GDP                            |\n| Total Revenue    | 17.2                                     | 16.5                                    | 17.3                                     | 17.1                                      | 17.6                                      | 16.9                                      | 17.5                                      | 17.0                                      | 16.8                                      |\n| Ordinary Revenue | 15.0                                     | 14.3                                    | 14.6                                     | 14.1                                      | 14.4                                      | 13.9                                      | 14.7                                      | 14.4                                      | 14.1                                      |\n| Nominal GDP      | 100.0                                    | 100.0                                   | 100.0                                    | 100.0                                     | 100.0                                     | 100.0                                     | 100.0                                     | 100.0                                     | 100.0                                     |"},{"table_page":66,"section":"3.3 Budgetary Allocations for the FY 2026/27 and the Medium-Term","markdown":"|       | SINO. [Details.                      | Financial Years.Approved Budget.2025/26   | Financial Years.2026 BPS Projectious.2026/27   | Financial Years.2026 BPS Projectious.2027/28   | Financial Years.2026 BPS Projectious.2028/29   |\n|:------|:-------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------|\n|       | Nationa] Government                  | 2,549,544.0                               | 2867,422.5                                     | 3,295.849.8                                    |                                                |\n|       | Executive                            |                                           | 2.788,701.9                                    | 3,213.931.3                                    |                                                |\n|       | Parliament                           | 47,990.7                                  | 48.778.9                                       | 51.0544                                        | 52.903.7                                       |\n|       | Judiciary                            | 27.779.8                                  | 29,941.8                                       | 30.858.2                                       | 33,285.1                                       |\n| 20    | Consolidated Fund Services           | 1,337,324.8                               | 1,450.123.4                                    | 1,462.858.1                                    | 1.497.723.8                                    |\n| 3.0   | [County Government- Sharable Revenue | 415,000.0                                 |                                                | 440.882.5                                      | 450.377.2                                      |\n|       | Iotal. KSh                           | 4,301,868.7                               | 4,737,545.9                                    | 5,199,590.4                                    | 5,417,168.9                                    |\n| 1.0   | Nationa] Governent                   | 59.3                                      | 60.5                                           | 63.4                                           | 66.7                                           |\n|       | Executive                            | 51.5                                      | 58.9                                           | 61.8                                           | 65.1                                           |\n|       | Parliament                           | 11                                        | 1.0                                            | 1.0                                            | 10                                             |\n|       | Judiciary                            | 0.6                                       | 0.6                                            | 0.6                                            | 0.6                                            |\n| 20    | Consolidated Fund Services           | 31.1                                      | 30.6                                           | 28.1                                           | 28.8                                           |\n| 3.0   | [County Government                   | 9.6                                       | 8.9                                            | 8.5                                            | 8.7                                            |\n| Notes | Notes                                | Notes                                     | Notes                                          | Notes                                          | Notes                                          |"},{"table_page":68,"section":"3.4 Details of Sector Priorities","markdown":"|     | Code /Sector.                            |            | Approred Budget.FY 2025/26   | BPS Projection.FY 2026/27   | BPS Projection.FY 2027/28               | BPS Projection.FY 2028/29   | FY 2025/26 Budget   |       |       |           |\n|:----|:-----------------------------------------|:-----------|:-----------------------------|:----------------------------|:----------------------------------------|:----------------------------|:--------------------|:------|:------|:----------|\n|     |                                          | [Subtotal  | 82,407.8                     | 97,007.0                    | 91,189.6                                | 101,647.6                   | 32                  | 3,4   |       | 29        |\n|     |                                          |            |                              | 41,357.6                    | 44,1085                                 | 47,3426                     | 19                  | 20    | 21    | 21        |\n|     |                                          | [Dev_Gross | 47,998.1                     | 55,6494                     | 47,081.1                                | 54305.0                     | 64                  | 66    | 40    | 43        |\n| 020 | [Energz                                  |            | 534,627.8                    |                             | 894,631.0                               | 894,928.0                   | 210                 | 20.7  | 27.1  | 25.8      |\n|     |                                          |            | 154,186.4                    | 151,620.4                   | 1550220                                 | 159,778.0                   | 85                  | 15    | 14    | 12        |\n|     |                                          | [Dev_Gross | 380,441.4                    | 442977.0                    | 739,6090                                |                             | 511                 | 523   | 623   | 58.6      |\n| 030 | [General Economic and Commercial Affairs |            | 58,159.8                     | 62,192.9                    | 70,492.0                                | 72,719,7                    | 23                  | 22    | 21    | 21        |\n|     |                                          |            | 36,5583                      | 37,562.7                    | 40,181.1                                | 41,740.6                    | 20                  | 19    | 19    | 19        |\n|     |                                          | [Dev_Gross | 24,6015                      | 24,630.2                    | 30,310.9                                | 30,979.1                    | 29                  | 29    | 26    | 25        |\n| 040 | [Health                                  |            | 138,1055                     | 167,407,0                   | 197,377.6                               | 203,1235                    | 54                  | 58    | 60    | 59        |\n|     |                                          |            | 110,608.3                    | 136,024.1                   | 1569385                                 | 164,143.2                   | 61                  | 6.7   | 14    |           |\n|     |                                          | [Dev_Gross | 27,491.3                     | 31,3829                     | 40,439.1                                | 38,9803                     | 37                  | 37    | 34    | 31        |\n| 050 | [Education                               |            | 703,066.2                    | 767,3142                    | 816,340.2                               | 869,390.7                   | 27.6                | 26.8  | 24.8  | 25.1      |\n|     |                                          |            | 673,286.4                    | 737,201.2                   | 781,274.2                               | 825,548.7                   | 313                 | 365   | 37.1  |           |\n|     |                                          | [Dev_Gross | 29,779.7                     | 30,113.0                    | 35,066.0                                | 43,842.0                    | 40                  | 3.6   | 30    | 35        |\n|     |                                          |            | 283,0424                     | 329,989.3                   | 339,252,2                               | 344,876.2                   |                     |       | 103   | 9.9       |\n|     |                                          |            | 264,118.5                    | 304,059.6                   | 310,983.7                               | 312,676.5                   | 14.6                | 150   | 14.7  | 141       |\n|     |                                          | [Dev_Gross | 18,923.9                     | 25,929.7                    | 28,268.5                                | 32,199.7                    | 25                  | 31    | 24    | 26        |\n|     |                                          |            | 321,503.2                    | 354,998.8                   | 385,257.6                               | 416,413.8                   | 12.6                | 124   | 1l7   | 120       |\n|     |                                          | [Rec Gross | 194,678.1                    | 224,280.9                   | 243,667.4                               | 266,363.2                   | 10.8                |       | 116   |           |\n|     |                                          | [Dev Gross | 126,825.1                    | 130,7117.9                  |                                         | 150,050.6                   | 170                 | 15.4  | 119   | 120       |\n|     |                                          | ISub_Total | 253,770.2                    | 299,983.3                   | 295,2554                                | 312,4755                    | 10.0                | 105   | 90    | 9,0       |\n|     |                                          | [Rec Gross | 248,836.2                    | 292,049.3                   | 281,3214                                | 293,5415                    | 13.8                | 145   | 133   | 133       |\n|     |                                          | [Dev Gross | 4934.0                       | 7,934.0                     | 13,9340                                 |                             | 0.7                 | 09    | 12    | 15        |\n| 090 | [Social Protection Culre and Recreation  |            | 78,994,4                     | 87,224.7                    | 83,3823                                 | 90,362,.9                   | 31                  | 30    | 25    | 26        |\n|     |                                          | [Rec Gross | 54,1453                      | 60,732.0                    |                                         | 61,5566                     | 30                  | 30    | 26    | 28        |\n|     |                                          | [Dev Gross | 24,8491                      | 26,492.7                    | 27,534.8                                | 28,8063                     | 33                  | 31    | 23    | 23        |\n|     |                                          |            | 95,866,7                     | 106,7080                    | 122,672.0                               | 163,130,0                   | 3.8                 | 37    | 37    |           |\n|     |                                          | [Rec Gross | 33,8791                      | 36,210.0                    | 39,081.0                                | 42,176.0                    | 19                  | 18    | 19    | 19        |\n|     |                                          | [Dev Gross | 61,9815                      | 70,498.0                    | 83,591.0                                | 120,9540                    | 83                  | 83    | 10    | 9.6       |\n|     | [Grand Total                             |            |                              |                             | 2,549,544.0 | 2,867,422.5 | 3,295,849.9 |                             | 100.0               | 100.0 | 100.0 | 100.0     |\n|     |                                          |            |                              |                             |                                         | 3,469,067.9                 |                     |       |       |           |\n|     |                                          | [Rec Gross | 1,804,7063                   |                             | 2,108,425.4                             | 2214866.9                   | 70.8                | 705   | 640   | 63.8 36.2 |\n|     |                                          | [Dev Gross |                              | 846,324.7                   | 1,187,4245                              | 1,254,201.0                 | 29.2                | 295   | 36.0  |           |"},{"table_page":79,"section":"4.1.1 County Governments Overall Expenditure for FY 2024/25","markdown":"| Item (KSh)                             | Approved Budget   | [Actual Figures   | [Overall Absorption Rates   |\n|:---------------------------------------|:------------------|:------------------|:----------------------------|\n| Iotal Revenue                          | 601.690.000.000   |                   |                             |\n| Total Expenditures                     | 601.689.110.000   | 470.735.360000    | 78.2                        |\n| Iotal Development Expenditures         | 218.989.610.000   | 123.757.190.000   | 56.5                        |\n| Total Recurrent Expenditures           | 382699.520000     |                   | 90.7                        |\n| Wages                                  |                   | 220.639.460000    |                             |\n| Other Recurrent                        |                   | 126.338.690000    |                             |\n| % of Development in Total Expenditure  | 36.4              | 26.3              |                             |\n| 0 of Recurent in Total Expenditure Exp | 63.6              | 73.7              |                             |\n| % of Wages in Total Revenue            |                   | 41.4              |                             |"},{"table_page":82,"section":"4.2.1 Performance of Own Source Revenue Against Target","markdown":"| Iarget Revenue.County   | Iarget Revenue.Ordinary OSR Target (KSh million)   | Iarget Revenue.FIFI AIA   | Iarget Revenue.Total OSR   | Actual Revenue.OrdinarylFIFIAIA OSR   | Actual Revenue.Actual (KSh Million)   | Actual Revenue.Revenue   | Actual Revenue.Performance of Actual Revenue (KSh Million) lagainst Iarget Revenue(%)   |\n|:------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------|:---------------------------|:--------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------|:-------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n| Kisii                   | 863                                                |                           | 863                        | 336.34                                | 982.09                                | 1338.64                  | 1779                                                                                    |\n| Tana River              |                                                    | 3.96                      |                            | 199.27                                | 3.96                                  | 203.23                   | 132.7                                                                                   |\n|                         | 298.21                                             | 31.79                     | 330                        | 206.39                                | 224.39                                |                          | 123.2                                                                                   |\n| Wajir                   | 90                                                 | 280                       | 270                        |                                       | 218.35                                | 331.72                   | 1229                                                                                    |\n| Kirinyaga               | 430.45                                             | 218                       | 648.45                     | 362.6                                 |                                       | 794.22                   | 222.5                                                                                   |\n|                         | 260                                                | 240                       | 400                        | 94.72                                 |                                       | 478.8                    |                                                                                         |\n| Vihigz                  |                                                    | 276.49                    | 340                        | 186.47                                |                                       | 397.86                   | 2270                                                                                    |\n|                         | 262.93                                             |                           | 282.63                     | 300.42                                | 9,41                                  | 309.83                   | 210.0                                                                                   |\n|                         | 347                                                |                           | 1097.00                    | 404.82                                |                                       |                          | 106.0                                                                                   |\n|                         | 107.43                                             | 243                       | 352.43                     | 79,47                                 | 288.02                                | 367.49                   | 104.3                                                                                   |\n| Homa Bay                | 502.74                                             | 981.07                    | 1482.81                    | 390.67                                |                                       | 1,490.38                 | 100.3                                                                                   |\n|                         |                                                    | 139                       | 400                        |                                       | 229.69                                | 400.83                   | 100.2                                                                                   |\n| Iharaka-Nithi           | 285                                                | 200                       | 485                        | 238.28                                | 243.51                                | 481.79                   | 99.3                                                                                    |\n| Weat Pokot              | 97.2                                               | 232.8                     | 230                        | 85.67                                 |                                       | 228.08                   | 99.2                                                                                    |\n| Narok                   |                                                    | 220.95                    | 6.032.00                   | 5,522.53                              |                                       |                          | 93.9                                                                                    |\n| Lamv                    | 220                                                | 230                       | 250                        | 92.23                                 | 239.22                                | 232.24                   | 92.3                                                                                    |\n| Nandi                   | 308.94                                             | 333.23                    | 8442 7                     | 374,68                                | 392.02                                |                          |                                                                                         |\n| Nyari                   |                                                    | 836.3                     | 2,636.30                   | 683.88                                | 769.2                                 |                          | 88.8                                                                                    |\n| Karicho                 | 376.24                                             | 646.36                    | 1222.60                    | 396.73                                | 682.9                                 | 1079.63                  | 88.3                                                                                    |\n| Kitzi                   |                                                    | 754.39                    | 1018.50                    |                                       | 631.3                                 | 895.42                   | 87.9                                                                                    |\n| Laikipia                | 842.5                                              | 602.3                     |                            | 373.09                                | 693.97                                | 1,269.06                 | 87.8                                                                                    |\n| Makreni                 | 905.28                                             | 566.26                    |                            |                                       |                                       |                          | 87 4                                                                                    |\n| Nyamira                 | 400                                                |                           | 850                        |                                       | 606.6                                 |                          | 87.2                                                                                    |\n| Migori                  | 330                                                | 230                       |                            | 337.36                                | 334.29                                | 692.36                   |                                                                                         |\n|                         | 2395.00                                            | 79.15                     |                            | 2020.39                               | 233.04                                |                          | 84.3                                                                                    |\n|                         | 830                                                | 730                       |                            |                                       | 334.64                                | 1319.78                  |                                                                                         |\n| Kvale                   | 350                                                | 300                       |                            | 293.21                                | 242.37                                | 335.78                   | 824                                                                                     |\n|                         | 2,448.76                                           | 1997.21                   | 4445.97                    | 1,850.24                              | 1,797.79                              | 3.647.92                 |                                                                                         |\n| Irans Nzoia             | 368.3                                              | 3227                      | 680                        | 288.4 -                               | 251.45                                | 539.92                   | 794                                                                                     |\n|                         | 600                                                | 250                       |                            | 370.72                                | 282.33                                | 653.24                   | 76.9                                                                                    |\n| Barinzo                 | 380.-                                              | 220                       | 600.-                      |                                       |                                       | 461.13                   | 76.8                                                                                    |\n| Kilig                   | 2570.80                                            | 400                       | 2,970.80                   | 888.26                                | 622.22                                |                          | 76.6                                                                                    |\n| Bomet                   | 233,73                                             | 227                       |                            | 136-3                                 |                                       |                          | 76.2                                                                                    |\n|                         | 5,680.66                                           | 1,250.00                  | 6,930.66                   | 4,208.73                              | 916.99                                | 5,125.71                 | 74.0                                                                                    |\n| Marabit                 |                                                    |                           |                            | 80.98                                 | 104.43                                |                          | 73.8                                                                                    |\n| Bria                    |                                                    |                           |                            | 266.93                                | 239.05                                | 505.98                   | 72.6                                                                                    |\n| Embr                    | 827.38                                             | 476.05                    |                            | 399.24                                |                                       | 926.99                   | 70.4                                                                                    |\n| Kiambv                  |                                                    |                           | 7,250.94                   |                                       | 1826.89                               | 5,060.34                 | 69.8                                                                                    |\n| Nairobi City            | 20,060.93                                          |                           | 20,060.93                  |                                       | 2398.03                               | 23,288.79                | 65.7                                                                                    |\n| Kakameza                | 1,339.00                                           | 842                       | 2,200.00                   | 343.23                                | 894.8                                 | 1437.93                  | 63 4                                                                                    |\n| Kisrmv                  |                                                    | 932.12                    | 3,804.07                   | 803.36                                | 1,659.67                              | 2,463.03                 | 64.7                                                                                    |\n| Brnzomz                 | 1,042.46                                           | 73347                     |                            | 483.33                                | 663.26                                | 12148.79                 | 64.6                                                                                    |\n|                         | 600                                                | 250                       |                            | 318.64                                | 229.35                                |                          |                                                                                         |\n|                         |                                                    |                           | 37221                      | 251.26                                | 64.89                                 | 216.25                   |                                                                                         |\n| Machako;                | 3,021.92                                           | 903.88                    | 3.925.79                   |                                       |                                       | 2282.84                  |                                                                                         |\n| Kajiado                 | 2200.00                                            | 440                       | 2,640.00                   |                                       | 326.4                                 | 907.54                   |                                                                                         |\n|                         | 643.39 66.902.49                                   | 283.93                    | 927.34                     | 236.84                                | 199.84                                | 436.68                   | 472                                                                                     |\n| Total                   |                                                    | 20.767.20                 | 87.669.66                  |                                       |                                       |                          | 76.8                                                                                    |"},{"table_page":84,"section":"4.2.2 OSR Growth in FY 2024/25","markdown":"| Couuty                 | Actual OSR Collected FY 2023/24 (KSh Millions)   | Actual OSR Collected 2024/25 (KSh Jillions   | Difference in OSR Collection   | FY 2024/25 Gronth Rate   |\n|:-----------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------|\n| Mombasa                | 2.279.67                                         | 4.208-73                                     | 1929.06                        | 84.6%                    |\n| 2INyamira              | 77.14                                            | 134-53                                       |                                | 74.4%                    |\n| 3siaya                 |                                                  | 236.84                                       | 100-76                         |                          |\n| Taita-Taveta           | 186-9                                            | 318-64                                       | 131-74                         |                          |\n| sMurang 2              | 481-13                                           | 785-14                                       | 304-01                         | 63-2%                    |\n| Embu                   | 244 99                                           | 399 24                                       | 154-25                         | 63.0%                    |\n| Kisii                  | 347                                              | 556.54                                       | 209.54                         |                          |\n| SINandi                | 234-61                                           | 374-68                                       | 140.07                         | 59-70                    |\n| 9|west Pokot           | 54-36                                            | 85.67                                        | 31-.31                         |                          |\n| 1olKwale               | 186-78                                           | 293-21                                       | 106.43                         |                          |\n| 11 Tharaka-Nithi       | 152-18                                           |                                              | 86-1                           | 56.6%                    |\n| 12 Busia               | 170-76                                           | 266.93                                       | 96-17                          | 56.30                    |\n| 13 Kiambu              | 2.083.51                                         | 3,243.45                                     | 1159.94                        |                          |\n| 14 Marsabit            | 52.04                                            | 80.98                                        |                                | 55.6%                    |\n|                        | 369.4                                            |                                              |                                | 55-10                    |\n| 16 Kilifi              | 577.34                                           | 888-26                                       | 310.92                         | 53.9%                    |\n| 17 Kitui               | 171.88                                           | 264-11                                       | 92-23                          |                          |\n| 18 Nyandarua           | 242.04                                           | 370-71                                       | 128.67                         |                          |\n| 19 Bomet               | 102-33                                           | 156.15                                       | 53.82                          | 52.6%                    |\n| 20 Vihiga              | 123.3                                            | 186.47                                       | 63-17                          |                          |\n| 21 Kericho             | 264-1                                            | 396-75                                       | 132-65                         |                          |\n|                        | 226.42                                           | 337.36                                       | 110.94                         |                          |\n| 23 Nyeri               | 461-33                                           | 683-88                                       | 222.55                         |                          |\n| 24 Meru                | 275-29                                           | 404-82                                       | 129-53                         |                          |\n| 25|Makueni             | 350-75                                           | 512-22                                       | 161.47                         | 46.0%                    |\n|                        | 127059                                           | 1.850.14                                     |                                |                          |\n| 27 Mandera             | 143.47                                           | 206.59                                       | 63-12                          | 44.0%                    |\n| 28 Turkana             | 120.52                                           | 171.14                                       | 50.62                          | 42.0%                    |\n| 29Machakos             | 1.008.17                                         | 1.426-15                                     | 417.98                         | 41-50                    |\n| 30 Elgeyo_Maralwet     | 56.45                                            | 79.47                                        | 23.02                          | 40.8%                    |\n| 31 Kirinvaga           | 258-57                                           | 362.6                                        | 104.03                         | 40.2%                    |\n|                        | 205-91                                           | 288.47                                       |                                | 40-1%                    |\n| 33 Kajiado             | 427-11                                           | 591-14                                       | 164-03                         | 38.4%                    |\n| 34 Lamu                | 66-77                                            | 92-13                                        | 25.36                          | 38.0%                    |\n|                        | 352-7                                            | 485-53                                       | 132-83                         | 37-79                    |\n| Homa                   | 285-54                                           | 390.67                                       | 105-13                         | 36.8%                    |\n| 36 37|Nairobi City     | 8.711-69                                         | 11,790-75                                    | 3079-06                        |                          |\n| 38 Uasin Gishu         | 760-32                                           | 1,010.39                                     |                                | 32.9%                    |\n| 39|Kisuu               | 611.96                                           | 803-36                                       | 191.4                          |                          |\n| 4oBaringo              | 190-86                                           | 250-26                                       |                                | 31-1%                    |\n| 41 Garissa             | 73.4                                             | 94-72                                        |                                | 29.0%                    |\n| 42                     | 232.87                                           | 300.42                                       | 67.55                          | 29.0%                    |\n| 43 Wajir               | 87.93                                            | 113.37                                       | 25.44                          | 28.90                    |\n| 44 Isiolo              |                                                  | 151-26                                       | 28.98                          |                          |\n| 45 Tana River 46 Narok | 163-18 4,878.99                                  | 199.27                                       | 36.09 633.54                   | 22-1% 13.0%              |\n| 47Kakamega             | 640.55                                           | 543.13                                       | 97.42                          |                          |"},{"table_page":86,"section":"4.3 County Government Pending Bills","markdown":"|   No.No | County.County   | County Executive.Recurrent   | County Executive.Development   | Sub-Total   | Recurrent   | Development   | Sub-Total   | Grand Total.Grand Total   | FY 2024/25 Budget.FY 2024/25 Budget   |   Percent of Pending Bill to Budget.Percent of Pending Bill to Budget |\n|--------:|:----------------|:-----------------------------|:-------------------------------|:------------|:------------|:--------------|:------------|:--------------------------|:--------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------:|\n|       1 | Nairobi         | 78,949.10                    | 7,169.40                       | 86,118.60   | 650.6       |               | 650.6       | 86,769.20                 | 43,564.27                             |                                                                   199 |\n|       2 | Kilifi          | 3,820.10                     | 5,367.40                       | 9,187.40    | 68.2        | -             | 68.2        | 9,255.60                  | 21,406.50                             |                                                                    43 |\n|       3 | Machakos        | 3,785.10                     | 2,695.10                       | 6,480.10    | 251.7       | 1.9           | 253.6       | 6,733.80                  | 15,622.16                             |                                                                    43 |\n|       4 | Narok           | 3,962.60                     | 2,188.90                       | 6,151.50    |             |               |             | 6,151.50                  | 17,567.52                             |                                                                    35 |\n|       5 | Kiambu          | 4,259.90                     | 3,352.70                       | 7,612.60    | 244         | 31.2          | 275.2       | 7,887.90                  | 23,480.38                             |                                                                    34 |\n|       6 | Busia           | 1,382.30                     | 1,258.90                       | 2,641.20    | 620.5       | -             | 620.5       | 3,261.70                  | 10,770.15                             |                                                                    30 |\n|       7 | Wajir           | 1,324.10                     | 2,155.00                       | 3,479.10    | 233.5       |               | 233.5       | 3,712.60                  | 13,517.62                             |                                                                    27 |\n|       8 | Tana River      | 1,293.18                     | 1,060.06                       | 2,353.25    | 0           |               | 0           | 2,353.25                  | 9,177.72                              |                                                                    26 |\n|       9 | Taita-Taveta    | 1,364.40                     | 653.1                          | 2,017.50    | 38.4        |               | 38.4        | 2,055.90                  | 8,179.70                              |                                                                    25 |\n|      10 | Bungoma         | 2,227.50                     | 1,368.50                       | 3,596.00    | 14.7        | -             | 14.7        | 3,610.70                  | 16,704.46                             |                                                                    22 |\n|      11 | Garissa         | 747.2                        | 1,677.40                       | 2,424.60    | 116.3       | 45            | 161.3       | 2,585.90                  | 12,005.81                             |                                                                    22 |\n|      12 | Laikipia        | 856.3                        | 999.7                          | 1,856.00    | 10.4        |               | 10.4        | 1,866.40                  | 8,479.54                              |                                                                    22 |\n|      13 | Mombasa         | 2,439.40                     | 1,310.80                       | 3,750.10    | 117.5       |               | 117.5       | 3,867.70                  | 17,360.00                             |                                                                    22 |\n|      14 | Embu            | 924.2                        | 822.7                          | 1,746.90    | 16.2        | -             | 16.2        | 1,763.10                  | 8,533.54                              |                                                                    21 |\n|      15 | Kajiado         | 1,087.50                     | 1,458.20                       | 2,545.70    | 30.6        | 69.6          | 100.2       | 2,646.00                  | 12,786.47                             |                                                                    21 |\n|      16 | Kericho         | 661.3                        | 1,367.00                       | 2,028.30    | -           | 53.8          | 53.8        | 2,082.10                  | 9,756.94                              |                                                                    21 |\n|      17 | Murang'a        | 1,588.10                     | 333.4                          | 1,921.50    | 72.2        |               | 72.2        | 1,993.70                  | 10,743.65                             |                                                                    19 |\n|      18 | Mandera         | 968.3                        | 1,525.40                       | 2,493.70    |             | 6.1           | 6.1         | 2,499.80                  | 14,567.55                             |                                                                    17 |\n|      19 | Nyandarua       | 571.6                        | 869.1                          | 1,440.70    | 71.3        |               | 71.3        | 1,512.00                  | 8,779.76                              |                                                                    17 |\n|      20 | Siaya           | 832.9                        | 1,057.00                       | 1,890.00    |             |               | -           | 1,890.00                  | 10,948.13                             |                                                                    17 |\n|      21 | Bomet           | 600                          | 857.4                          | 1,457.40    | 20.1        | 45.8          | 65.9        | 1,523.20                  | 9,831.70                              |                                                                    15 |\n|      22 | Isiolo          | 786.9                        | 209.8                          | 996.7       | 5.8         | 8.1           | 13.9        | 1,010.60                  | 6,805.05                              |                                                                    15 |\n|      23 | Nakuru          | 2,850.40                     | 668.7                          | 3,519.20    | 158         |               | 158         | 3,677.20                  | 23,980.40                             |                                                                    15 |\n|      24 | Marsabit        | 532.5                        | 700.2                          | 1,232.60    | 30.6        | 170.6         | 201.2       | 1,433.80                  | 10,318.61                             |                                                                    14 |"},{"table_page":87,"section":"4.3 County Government Pending Bills","markdown":"| No.No   | County.County   | County Executive.Recurrent   | County Executive.Development   | Sub-Total   | Recurrent   | Development   | Sub-Total   | Grand Total.Grand Total   | FY 2024/25 Budget.FY 2024/25 Budget   |   Percent of Pending Bill to Budget.Percent of Pending Bill to Budget |\n|:--------|:----------------|:-----------------------------|:-------------------------------|:------------|:------------|:--------------|:------------|:--------------------------|:--------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------:|\n| 25.     | Trans Nzoia     | 805.4                        | 703                            | 1,508.40    |             |               | -           | 1,508.40                  | 10,455.02                             |                                                                    14 |\n| 26.     | Kwale           | 654.5                        | 915.5                          | 1,570.00    | 187.5       | 142.1         | 329.6       | 1,899.60                  | 14,876.06                             |                                                                    13 |\n| 27.     | Meru            | 829.7                        | 848.7                          | 1,678.40    | 63.5        |               | 63.5        | 1,741.90                  | 13,108.95                             |                                                                    13 |\n| 28.     | Homa Bay        | 715.1                        | 726.1                          | 1,441.30    | 102.6       | 94.3          | 197         | 1,638.20                  | 13,130.57                             |                                                                    12 |\n| 29.     | Kakamega        | 773.6                        | 938.2                          | 1,711.90    | 454.4       | -             | 454.4       | 2,166.30                  | 17,646.79                             |                                                                    12 |\n| 30.     | Vihiga          | 211.2                        | 621                            | 832.2       |             |               | -           | 832.2                     | 7,105.90                              |                                                                    12 |\n| 31.     | Tharaka-Nithi   | 468.6                        | 176.2                          | 644.7       | 82.9        | 13.9          | 96.8        | 741.6                     | 7,005.68                              |                                                                    11 |\n| 32.     | Kirinyaga       | 316.2                        | 486.7                          | 802.9       | -           | -             | -           | 802.9                     | 7,925.71                              |                                                                    10 |\n| 33.     | Nandi           | 476                          | 495.7                          | 971.7       | -           | 13.5          | 13.5        | 985.1                     | 10,188.22                             |                                                                    10 |\n| 34.     | Kisumu          | 507.8                        | 838                            | 1,345.90    | 2.5         | 2.1           | 4.6         | 1,350.50                  | 15,314.33                             |                                                                     9 |\n| 35.     | Migori          | 475.9                        | 361.4                          | 837.2       | 184.6       | 36.4          | 220.9       | 1,058.10                  | 12,147.01                             |                                                                     9 |\n| 36.     | Turkana         | 43.6                         | 1,141.50                       | 1,185.10    |             | 144.3         | 144.3       | 1,329.30                  | 17,213.59                             |                                                                     8 |\n| 37.     | Kisii           | 594.5                        | 401.8                          | 996.3       | 8.2         | 28.4          | 36.6        | 1,033.00                  | 15,155.35                             |                                                                     7 |\n| 38.     | Makueni         | 558                          | 98.6                           | 656.6       | 161.5       |               | 161.5       | 818.2                     | 11,580.21                             |                                                                     7 |\n| 39.     | Uasin Gishu     | 199.7                        | 863.6                          | 1,063.20    | 57.7        |               | 57.7        | 1,121.00                  | 15,179.79                             |                                                                     7 |\n| 40.     | Baringo         | 202.3                        | 143.9                          | 346.3       | -           | -             | -           | 346.3                     | 8,983.76                              |                                                                     4 |\n| 41.     | Nyamira         | 218                          | 114.2                          | 332.2       | -           | 8.2           | 8.2         | 340.4                     | 8,102.90                              |                                                                     4 |\n| 42.     | Nyeri           | 321.1                        | 27.8                           | 348.9       | 6           |               | 6           | 354.9                     | 9,004.03                              |                                                                     4 |\n| 43.     | West Pokot      | 215.3                        | 75                             | 290.3       | 21.5        |               | 21.5        | 311.8                     | 8,101.51                              |                                                                     4 |\n| 44.     | Samburu         | 35                           | 140.6                          | 175.5       | 46.4        | 9.3           | 55.7        | 231.3                     | 7,382.22                              |                                                                     3 |\n| 45.     | Kitui           | 173.7                        | 56.1                           | 229.9       | -           | -             | -           | 229.9                     | 14,305.36                             |                                                                     2 |\n| 46.     | Lamu            | 32.1                         | -                              | 32.1        |             |               | -           | 32.1                      | 4,988.65                              |                                                                     1 |\n| 47.     | Elgeyo-Marakwet | 3.1                          | 9.1                            | 12.1        | -           | -             | -           | 12.1                      | 7,899.87                              |                                                                     0 |\n| Total   | Total           | 126,645.28                   | 51,308.56                      | 177,953.75  | 4,149.90    | 924.6         | 5,074.50    | 183,028.75                | 601,689.11                            |                                                                    30 |"},{"table_page":89,"section":"4.4 Equalisation Fund","markdown":"| No.   | County          | Marginalized Areas   | Appropriated Amount   | Approved Projects   | Projects Budget   |\n|:------|:----------------|:---------------------|:----------------------|:--------------------|:------------------|\n| 1     | Baringo         | 90                   | 595,027,099           | 137                 | 568,246,610       |\n| 2     | Bomet           | 3                    | 19,215,175            | 3                   | 19,215,174        |\n| 3     | Bungoma         | 9                    | 58,779,836            | 7                   | 58,779,835        |\n| 4     | Busia           | 3                    | 17,979,656            | 3                   | 17,979,656        |\n| 5     | Elgeyo Marakwet | 11                   | 65,114,751            | 16                  | 56,644,349        |\n| 6     | Garissa         | 83                   | 630,912,260           | 91                  | 628,784,868       |\n| 7     | Homa-Bay        | 20                   | 131,603,304           | 31                  | 131,603,302       |\n| 8     | Isiolo          | 25                   | 166,157,751           | 25                  | 166,157,748       |\n| 9     | Kajiado         | 64                   | 414,765,595           | 29                  | 414,765,596       |\n| 10    | Kericho         | 10                   | 60,882,122            | 11                  | 54,681,482        |\n| 11    | Kilifi          | 78                   | 539,901,714           | 67                  | 537,169,000       |\n| 12    | Kisumu          | 4                    | 24,333,610            | 4                   | 23,603,602        |\n| 13    | Kitui           | 63                   | 397,477,349           | 105                 | 366,047,999       |\n| 14    | Kwale           | 39                   | 292,590,513           | 61                  | 290,451,457       |\n| 15    | Laikipia        | 18                   | 119,303,227           | 33                  | 115,677,719       |\n| 16    | Lamu            | 10                   | 57,614,460            | 10                  | 57,614,460        |\n| 17    | Machakos        | 2                    | 12,923,347            | 2                   | 12,923,347        |\n| 18    | Mandera         | 97                   | 753,408,998           | 89                  | 753,403,998       |\n| 19    | Marsabit        | 68                   | 469,644,478           | 103                 | 468,336,157       |\n| 20    | Meru            | 5                    | 29,927,013            | 6                   | 29,004,018        |\n| 21    | Migori          | 27                   | 177,764,414           | 41                  | 177,764,414       |\n| 22    | Murang'a        | 1                    | 5,679,579             | 1                   | 5,679,579         |\n| 23    | Nakuru          | 1                    | 6,435,119             | 1                   | 6,435,119         |\n| 24    | Nandi           | 19                   | 116,745,012           | 30                  | 116,745,012       |\n| 25    | Narok           | 112                  | 771,670,228           | 148                 | 715,984,924       |\n| 26    | Samburu         | 95                   | 649,686,536           | 39                  | 636,090,960       |\n| 27    | Siaya           | 5                    | 31,973,185            | 7                   | 31,973,185        |\n| 28    | Taita Taveta    | 2                    | 13,335,187            | 3                   | 13,332,929        |\n| 29    | Tana River      | 65                   | 442,122,368           | 61                  | 413,261,671       |\n| 30    | Tharaka-Nithi   | 7                    | 44,005,716            | 14                  | 42,915,203        |\n| 31    | Trans Nzoia     | 1                    | 7,478,246             | 1                   | 7,478,246         |\n| 32    | Turkana         | 144                  | 1,144,091,494         | 87                  | 1,071,965,691     |\n| 33    | Wajir           | 94                   | 730,167,615           | 220                 | 727,325,516       |\n| 34    | West Pokot      | 149                  | 1,021,690,952         | 70                  | 1,021,690,952     |\n| Total |                 | 1,424                | 10,020,407,909        | 1,556               | 9,759,733,778     |"},{"table_page":91,"section":"4.5.2.1 Application of Article 203 (1) of the Constitution in Division of Revenue","markdown":"| S/No   | ITEM DESCRIPTION (KSh Millions)                                                           | FY 2026/27   |\n|:-------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------|\n|        | ORDINARY REVENUE (EXCLUDING AIA)                                                          | 2,901,875    |\n| A      | National Interest [Article 203 (1)(a)]                                                    | 136,430      |\n| B      | Public debt (Art. 203 [1][b])                                                             | 1,542,069    |\n| C      | Other National obligations (Article 203 [1][b])                                           | 876,111      |\n| D      | Emergencies [Article 203 (1)(k)]                                                          | 2,000        |\n|        | Equalization Fund [Article 203 (1) (g) and (h)]. Of which:                                | 15,163       |\n| E      | a. Allocation in FY 2026/27                                                               | 9,602        |\n|        | b. Arrears                                                                                | 5,561        |\n| F      | Total Mandatory Expenditures under Article 203(1) (A+B+C+D+E)                             | 2,571,773    |\n| G      | BALANCE TO BE SHARED BY THE 2 LEVELSOFGOVERNMENT                                          | 330,101      |\n| H      | County Government allocation from revenue raised nationally of which; -                   | 438,293      |\n|        | a) Equitable Share of Revenue                                                             | 420,000      |\n|        | b) Additional conditional allocations financed from revenues raised nationally. Of which, | 18,293       |\n|        | i) Unconditional Additional Allocations                                                   | 1,981        |\n|        | ii) Conditional Additional Allocations                                                    | 16,312       |\n| I      | Balance left for the National Government                                                  | (108,192)    |"},{"table_page":91,"section":"4.5.2.1 Application of Article 203 (1) of the Constitution in Division of Revenue","markdown":"| Budget Item                                                                                                                   |         |         |         |         |         | FY 2019/0/FY 2020/21/FY 2021/22/FY 2022/23 FY 2023/24FY 2024/25 FY 2025/26/ FY2026/27   |         |         |\n|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------|:--------|:--------|:--------|:--------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------|:--------|\n| 1. Baseline (i.e. allocation in the previous FY)                                                                              | 314,000 | 316,500 | 316,500 | 370,000 | 370,000 | 385,425                                                                                 | 387,425 | 415,000 |\n| Add:                                                                                                                          |         |         |         |         |         |                                                                                         |         |         |\n| a. Revenue Shave (RMF, Level-5 Hospital Grant, Compensation for foregone use\" fees and Rehabilitation of Polytechnics Village |         |         | 17,400  |         |         |                                                                                         |         |         |\n| 6Adjustments for revenue growth                                                                                               | 2,500   |         | 36,100  |         | 15,000  | 2,000                                                                                   | 27,575  | 5,00o   |\n| Transfer of Librany Services                                                                                                  |         |         |         |         | 425     |                                                                                         |         |         |\n| Computed Equitable Revenue Share Allocation                                                                                   | 316,500 | 316,500 | 370,000 | 370,000 | 385,425 | 387,425                                                                                 | 415,000 | 420,000 |"},{"table_page":94,"section":"4.5.2.3 Horizontal Allocation of Revenue","markdown":"| [SNO..                  | County.                 | Allocation Ratio.    | Equitable Share.             | Baseline Allocation of KSh.Allocation Ratio   | Baseline Allocation of KSh.Equitable Share   | Affirmative Action Allocation of KSh 4.460 Billion in FY.2026/27   | Additional Equitable Share Abore KSh 391.885 (KSh 35.565 Billion) |Share Allocation for 4th Generation Formula Using -.   | Additional Equitable Share Abore KSh 391.885 (KSh 35.565 Billion) |Share Allocation for 4th Generation Formula Using -.Allocation Ratio | Equitable Share   | Total Equitable FY 2026/27.   |\n|:------------------------|:------------------------|:---------------------|:-----------------------------|:----------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------|\n|                         |                         |                      |                              |                                               |                                              |                                                                    | Columu F                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                             | Column G |Column H-D+E+G      |\n| [Baringo                | [Baringo                | 1.72965677           | 7,083,683,384                | 1.72520442                                    | 6,683,873,223                                |                                                                    | 1.72965677                                                                                                                | 486,293,000                                                                                                                                                 | 7,170,166,223                 |\n| 2/Bomet                 | 2/Bomet                 | 1.86925695           | 7,447,200,499                | 1.81070446                                    | 7,015,121,755                                |                                                                    | 1.86925695                                                                                                                | 525,541,592                                                                                                                                                 | 7,40,663,347                  |\n| 3 [Bungoma              | 3 [Bungoma              | 2.88722071           | 11,838,054,666               | 2.88331254                                    | 11,170,673,599                               |                                                                    | 2.88722071                                                                                                                | 811,742,102                                                                                                                                                 | 11,982,415,701                |\n| 4Busia                  | 4Busia                  | 191057095            | 7,956,64,058                 | 193971364                                     | 7,514,935,582                                |                                                                    | 191057095                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                             | 8,052,092,605                 |\n| slElgeyo-Marakwet       | slElgeyo-Marakwet       | 137031376            | 5,515,146,712                | 1.24584940                                    | 4,826,732,019                                | 371,666,667                                                        | 137031376                                                                                                                 | 385,263,714                                                                                                                                                 | 5,83,662,400                  |\n| 6lEmbu                  | 6lEmbu                  | 1.45307451           | 6,077,441,672                | 1.38604809                                    | 5,369,896,832                                | 371,666,667                                                        | 1.45307451                                                                                                                | 408,531,899                                                                                                                                                 | 6,150,095,398                 |\n| Garissa                 | Garissa                 | 2.54093580           | 8,877,784,676                | 2.13988446                                    | 8,290,447,365                                |                                                                    | 2.54093580                                                                                                                | 714,384,101                                                                                                                                                 | 9,004,831,466                 |\n|                         |                         | 2.05968100           | 8,646,376,063                | 2.10886773                                    | 8,170,280,800                                |                                                                    | 2.05968100                                                                                                                | 579,079,313                                                                                                                                                 | 8,749,360,113                 |\n| 9Isiolo                 | 9Isiolo                 | 1.45439517           | 5631,357,298                 | 1.27082847                                    | 4,923,507,187                                | 371,666,667                                                        | 145439517                                                                                                                 | 408,903,203                                                                                                                                                 | 5,704,077,057                 |\n|                         |                         | 237612492            | 8,894,254,886                | 2.15396880                                    | 8,345,013,610                                |                                                                    | 237612492                                                                                                                 | 668,047,522                                                                                                                                                 | 9,013,061,132                 |\n|                         |                         | 3.00387301           | 13,674,848,566               | 3.35045578                                    | 12,980,503,320                               |                                                                    | 3.00387301                                                                                                                | 844,538,897                                                                                                                                                 | 13,825,042,217                |\n| 12/Kericho              | 12/Kericho              | 1.90440430           | 7,178,668,356                |                                               | 6,738,465,302                                |                                                                    | 1.90440430                                                                                                                | 535,423,269                                                                                                                                                 | 7,273,888,571                 |\n| 13 Kiambu               | 13 Kiambu               | 3.36630462           | 13,071,817,986               | 3.17318105                                    | 12,293,696,674                               |                                                                    | 3.36630462                                                                                                                | 946,436,543                                                                                                                                                 | 13,240,133,217                |\n|                         |                         | 2.78413711           | 12,813,396,770               | 3.14121274                                    | 12,169,843,476                               |                                                                    | 2.78413711                                                                                                                | 782,760,150                                                                                                                                                 | 12,952,603,626                |\n|                         |                         | 1.43077009           | 6,151,661,892                | 1.40653616                                    | 5,449,272,719                                | 371,666,667                                                        | 1.43077009                                                                                                                | 402,261,011                                                                                                                                                 | 6,223,200,397                 |\n|                         |                         | 2.22317145           |                              | 2.40197088                                    | 9,305,835,688                                |                                                                    | 2.22317145                                                                                                                | 625,044,653                                                                                                                                                 | 9,930,880,341                 |\n| 17 Kisumu               | 17 Kisumu               | 2.14881404           | 8,902,026,938                | 2.16953696                                    | 8,405,328,573                                |                                                                    | 2.14881404                                                                                                                | 604,139,067                                                                                                                                                 | 9,009,467,640                 |\n|                         |                         | 2.67332787           | 11,503,907,837               | 2.80982593                                    | 10,885,968,099                               |                                                                    | 2.67332787                                                                                                                | 751,606,132                                                                                                                                                 | 11,637,574,231                |\n| 19 Kwale                | 19 Kwale                | 196101250            | 9,078,699,643                | 2.22634358                                    | 8,625,411,603                                |                                                                    | 196101250                                                                                                                 | 551,338,665                                                                                                                                                 | 9,176,750,268                 |\n|                         |                         | 1.49418391           | 6,104,082,008                | 1.39047164                                    | 5387,034,732                                 | 371,666,667                                                        | 1.49418391                                                                                                                | 420,089,805                                                                                                                                                 | 6,178,791,204                 |\n| 21 amu                  | 21 amu                  | 1.00161720           | 3,857,621,205                | 0.84001567                                    | 3,254,430,723                                | 371,666,667                                                        | 1.00161720                                                                                                                | 281,604,675                                                                                                                                                 |                               |\n| 22/Machakos             | 22/Machakos             | 251745075            | 10,179,132,681               | 2.47718241                                    |                                              |                                                                    | 251745075                                                                                                                 | 707,781,278                                                                                                                                                 | 10,305,005,218                |\n| 23 |Makueni             | 23 |Makueni             | 2.07236592           |                              | 2.19327825                                    | 8,497,308,272                                |                                                                    | 2.07236592                                                                                                                | 582,645,678                                                                                                                                                 | 9,079,.953,950                |\n| 24/Mandera              | 24/Mandera              | 248516735            | 12,265,064.993               | 3.01751786                                    | 11,690,618,360                               |                                                                    | 248516735                                                                                                                 | 698,704,801                                                                                                                                                 | 12,389,323,361                |\n| 25 Marsabit             | 25 Marsabit             | 2.19994759           | 8,105,669,078                | 1.96093468                                    |                                              |                                                                    | 2.19994759                                                                                                                | 618,515,264                                                                                                                                                 | 8,215,666,458                 |\n|                         |                         | 2.63727267           | 10,553,946.059               | 2.56677821                                    | 9,944,340,480                                |                                                                    | 2.63727267                                                                                                                | 741,469,212                                                                                                                                                 | 10,685,809,692                |\n|                         |                         | 2.15818006           | 8,883,939,719                | 2.16430958                                    | 8,385,076,399                                |                                                                    | 2.15818006                                                                                                                | 606,772,323                                                                                                                                                 | 8,991,848,722                 |\n| 28/Mombasa              | 28/Mombasa              | 2.09262921           | 8,383,385,281                | 2.03902021                                    | 7,899,674,038                                |                                                                    | 2.09262921                                                                                                                | 588,342,704                                                                                                                                                 | 8,488,016,742                 |\n| 29/Muranga              | 29/Muranga              | 197965756            | 7,969,464,876                | 1.93892161                                    |                                              |                                                                    | 197965756                                                                                                                 | 556,580,723                                                                                                                                                 | 8,068,447,754                 |\n| 3o Nairobi City         | 3o Nairobi City         | 535763115            | 21,417,128,397               | 5.20841762                                    | 20,178,711,957                               |                                                                    | 535763115                                                                                                                 | 1,506,297,997                                                                                                                                               | 21,685,009.954                |\n|                         |                         | 3.40969073           | 14,455,147,658               | 3.52764991                                    | 13,666.997,646                               |                                                                    | 3.40969073                                                                                                                | 958,634,548                                                                                                                                                 | 14,625,632,194                |\n| 32/Nandi                | 32/Nandi                | 184169137            | 7,771,778,066                | 1.89612728                                    | 7,346,071,107                                |                                                                    | 1.84169137                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                             | 7,863,862,634 9,884,627,469   |\n| 33 Narok                | 33 Narok                | 2.28620647           |                              | 2.38545796                                    | 9,241,860,519                                |                                                                    | 2.28620647                                                                                                                | 642,766,950                                                                                                                                                 |                               |\n| 34Nyamira               | 34Nyamira               | 1.47860565           | 6,073,434,356                | 138349048                                     | 5,359.987,994                                | 371,666,667                                                        | 1.47860565                                                                                                                | 415,709,977                                                                                                                                                 | 6,147,364,638                 |\n| 35 Nyandarua            | 35 Nyandarua            | 153358128            | 6,662,675,631                | 153230216                                     | 5936,521,652                                 | 371,666,667                                                        | 153358128                                                                                                                 | 431,166,376                                                                                                                                                 | 6,739,354,695                 |\n| 36 Nyeri                | 36 Nyeri                | 1.63323997           | 6,896,132,673                | 1.68254740                                    |                                              |                                                                    | 1.63323997                                                                                                                | 459,185,417                                                                                                                                                 | 6,977,794,672                 |\n|                         |                         | 147988401            | 6,336,970,364                | 1.45143667                                    | 5,623,228,509                                | 371,666,667                                                        | 1.47988401                                                                                                                | 416,069,389                                                                                                                                                 | 6,410,964,564                 |\n| 38 Siaya 39 Tata-Iaveta | 38 Siaya 39 Tata-Iaveta | 195978998            | 7,754,478,885                | 1.88461597                                    | 7,301,473,431                                |                                                                    | 195978998                                                                                                                 | 550,994,953                                                                                                                                                 | 7,852,468,384 5,830,240,868   |\n|                         |                         | 139582365            | 5,760,449,685                | 130764364                                     |                                              | 371,666,667                                                        | 139582365                                                                                                                 | 392,435,818                                                                                                                                                 | 7,308,513,210                 |\n|                         |                         | 1.72076961           | 1,222,474,730                | 176155871                                     | 6,824,718,834                                |                                                                    | 1.72076961                                                                                                                | 483,794,376                                                                                                                                                 |                               |\n| 41 Tharaka-Nithi        | 41 Tharaka-Nithi        | 1.24209956           | 5,058,286,293                | 1.13557677                                    | 4,399,508,312                                | 371,666,667                                                        | 1.24209956                                                                                                                | 349,216,292                                                                                                                                                 | 5.120,391,271                 |\n| 44|Uasin-Gishu          | 44|Uasin-Gishu          | 194946967 2.93875860 | 7,991,120,837 13,892,577,371 | 194631243 3.41053967                          | 13,213,283,320                               |                                                                    | 1.94946967 2.93875860                                                                                                     | 548,093,399 826,231,981                                                                                                                                     | 8,088,594,321 14,039,515,301  |\n|                         |                         | 2.18306645           | 8,977,014,770                | 2.18684880                                    |                                              |                                                                    | 2.18306645                                                                                                                | 613,769,131                                                                                                                                                 | 9,086,168,092                 |\n|                         |                         | 1.48891590           |                              |                                               |                                              | 371,666,667                                                        | 1.48891590                                                                                                                | 418,608,705                                                                                                                                                 |                               |\n|                         |                         | 2.61640338           | 6,008,751,224 10,507,580,683 | 136617969 2.55605576                          | 5,292,921,648                                |                                                                    | 2.61640338                                                                                                                | 735,601,811                                                                                                                                                 | 6,083,197,019 10,638,400,852  |\n| 46 Wajir 47WVest Pokot  | 46 Wajir 47WVest Pokot  | 1.69885483           |                              | 1.70606846                                    | 6,609,735,714                                |                                                                    | 1.69885483                                                                                                                | 477,633,036                                                                                                                                                 | 7,087,368,750                 |\n|                         |                         |                      | 7,002,426,008                |                                               | 387,425,000,000                              |                                                                    |                                                                                                                           | 28,115,000,000                                                                                                                                              |                               |"},{"table_page":95,"section":"4.5.2.4 Additional Allocations to County Governments in FY 2026/27","markdown":"|                                                                                                                      | Project Description                                                                                                           | Amount in KSh.                                                                                                       |\n|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n| L Unconditional Additional Allocations Financed from National Governemnts Share of Revenue                           | L Unconditional Additional Allocations Financed from National Governemnts Share of Revenue                                    | L Unconditional Additional Allocations Financed from National Governemnts Share of Revenue                           |\n|                                                                                                                      | Unconditional Additional Allocations from Court fines                                                                         |                                                                                                                      |\n|                                                                                                                      | Unconditional Additional Allocationsfrom 20% Share of Mineral Royalties to County Governemnts                                 | 1,833,128,821                                                                                                        |\n| IL Conditional Additional Allocations Financed from Yational Governemnts Share of Revenue                            | IL Conditional Additional Allocations Financed from Yational Governemnts Share of Revenue                                     | IL Conditional Additional Allocations Financed from Yational Governemnts Share of Revenue                            |\n|                                                                                                                      | Conditional Additional Allocations for the Community Health Promoters (CHPs) Programme                                        | 3,234,930,000                                                                                                        |\n|                                                                                                                      | Conditional Additional Allocations to Supplement Construction of County Headquarters                                          | 523,100,000/                                                                                                         |\n|                                                                                                                      | Conditional Additional Allocations for the County Aggregation and Industrial Parks (CAIPs) Programme                          | 3,250,000,000                                                                                                        |\n|                                                                                                                      | Conditional Additional Allocations from 0.5% of Housing Levy Fund to the County Rural and Urban Affordable Housing Committees | 365,991,679                                                                                                          |\n|                                                                                                                      | Conditional Additional Allocations for the Remuneration of Universal Health Coverage (UHC) Workers                            | 8.937.615.000                                                                                                        |\n| Sub Total IILConditional Additional Allocations Financed from Proceeds of Loans and Grants from Development Partners | Sub Total IILConditional Additional Allocations Financed from Proceeds of Loans and Grants from Development Partners          | Sub Total IILConditional Additional Allocations Financed from Proceeds of Loans and Grants from Development Partners |\n|                                                                                                                      | AfD (France) Kenya Informal Settlement Improvement Project (KISIP) II                                                         | 400,000,000                                                                                                          |\n|                                                                                                                      | IDA (World Bank) - Building Resilience & Responsive Helath Systems (BREHS)                                                    |                                                                                                                      |\n|                                                                                                                      | KfW - Financing Locally-led Climate Action (FLoCA) Program County Climate Resilience Investment Grant (CCRI-G)                | 1,200,000,000                                                                                                        |\n|                                                                                                                      | [IDA (World Bank) Financing Locally-led Climate Action (FLoCA) Program County Climate Resilience Investment Grant CCRI-G)     | 6,187,500,000/                                                                                                       |\n|                                                                                                                      | IDA (World Bank) Food Systems Resilience Project (FSRP)                                                                       | 3,900,000,000                                                                                                        |\n|                                                                                                                      | [IDA (World Bank) National Agricultural Value Chain Development Project (NAVCDP)                                              | 3,560,000,000                                                                                                        |\n|                                                                                                                      | IDA (World Bank) Water and Sanitation Development Project (WSDP                                                               |                                                                                                                      |\n|                                                                                                                      | [IDA (World Bank) Kenya Urban Support Project (KUSP) Urban Institutional Grant (UIG)                                          | 954,734,992                                                                                                          |\n|                                                                                                                      | IDA (World Bank) Second Kenya Urban Support Project (KUSP) Urban Development Grant (UDG)                                      | 16,703,171,420                                                                                                       |\n| 10                                                                                                                   | IFAD Kenva Livestock Commercialization Project (KeLCoP)                                                                       | 378,730,000                                                                                                          |\n| 11                                                                                                                   | KfW Drought Resilience Programme in Northern Kenya (DRPNK)                                                                    | 853,600,000                                                                                                          |\n| 13                                                                                                                   | [IDA (World Bank) Second Kenya Devolution Support Program (KDSP II) Institutional Grant (Level 1 Grant)                       | 1,762,500,000                                                                                                        |\n| 14                                                                                                                   | [IDA (World Bank) Second Kenya Devolution Support Program Service Delivery and Investment Grant (Level 2 Grant) (KDSP         | 7,755,000,000                                                                                                        |\n| 15                                                                                                                   | IDA (World Bank) Kenya Water; Sanitation and Hygiene (K-WASH) Programme                                                       | 4,282,086,900                                                                                                        |\n| 16                                                                                                                   | FFAD - Integrated Natural Resource Management (INReM) Programme                                                               | 812,442,000                                                                                                          |\n|                                                                                                                      | Sub Total                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                      |\n|                                                                                                                      | GRAND IOIAL                                                                                                                   | 75.692,790.182                                                                                                       |"},{"table_page":96,"section":"4.5.2.5  Allocation  of  Sharable  revenue  between  the  two  levels  of  Government  and  the additional allocations to counties from the National Government share of Revenue","markdown":"|                                                         | 2020/21    | 2021/22|   | 2022/23|   | 2023/24|   |                      |            | 2024/25|   2025/2026|   2026/2027   |\n|:--------------------------------------------------------|:-----------|:-----------|:-----------|:-----------|:---------------------|:-----------|:------------------------------------|\n|                                                         |            | 1,398,799| | 1,764516]  |            |                      | 2,319,813] | 2,472,273]                          |\n| Out ofwhichAdditional Allocations to County Governments | 6,505      | 7,537      | 5,363      | 10,117     | 16,925               | 12,837     | 17,927                              |\n| Leasing of Medical Equipment_                           | 6,205      | 7,205      | 5,200      |            |                      |            |                                     |\n|                                                         |            |            |            | 4,500      | 2,000                | 4,448      | 3,250                               |\n| ii) Road Maintenance Levv Fund                          |            |            |            |            | 10,552               |            |                                     |\n|                                                         | 300        | 332        | 163        | 454        |                      | 449        | 523                                 |\n| v) Community Health Promotevs (CHPs)                    |            |            |            |            | 2,584                | 3,235      | 3,235                               |\n| vil Transfevred Museums Function                        |            |            |            |            | 30                   |            |                                     |\n|                                                         |            |            |            |            | 1,759                | 1,759      |                                     |\n| i) Fertilizev Subsidy _ Progyam                         |            |            |            |            |                      |            |                                     |\n|                                                         |            |            |            | 163        |                      |            |                                     |\n| xi) Court fines                                         |            |            |            |            |                      | 12         | 148                                 |\n| xi) 20% Share of Mineral Rovalties                      |            |            |            |            |                      |            | 1,833                               |\n| xii)ransfev of UHC Workers                              |            |            |            |            |                      |            | 8,938                               |\n| [b) Equalization Fund                                   | 6,5oo|     | 6,825      | 7,068|     | 8,369|     |                      | 10,590     | 15,163                              |\n| Ofwhich: 1)0.5% Equilization Fund                       | 6,500      | 6,825      |            | 8,360      | 7,853                | 9,602      | 9,602                               |\n| ü) Equilization Fund_Arrears                            |            |            |            |            | 147                  | 987        | 5,561                               |\n| County Equitable Share                                  | 316,500|   |            |            | 385,425|   | 387,425|             |            |                                     |\n| Iotal Shareable Revenue                                 | 1,856,7oo/ | 1,775,624/ |            |            | 2,571,661/ 2,631,271 | 2,744,415] |                                     |"},{"table_page":96,"section":"4.5.2.6 Disaggregation of Total Proposed Transfers to the Counties","markdown":"|                                                  | 2019/20|   | 2020/21   |         |         | 2023/24   | 2024/25|   |         | 2026/27   |\n|:-------------------------------------------------|:-----------|:----------|:--------|:--------|:----------|:-----------|:--------|:----------|\n| 4 [County Equitable Share                        | 316,500    | 316,500   | 370,000 | 370,000 | 385,425   | 387,425    | 415,000 | 420,000   |\n| BlAdditional Allocations to County Governments   | 45,595     | 30,204    | 39,880  | 22,359  | 46,362    | 42,002     | 70,666  | 75,693    |\n| Ofwhich a) Gok-fuunded unconditional allocations |            |           |         |         | 10,117    |            | 2,946   |           |\n| 6) Gok-fimded conditional allocations            | 6,505      |           | 7,537   |         | 3,044     | 4,584      | 9,984   | 16,312    |\n|                                                  | 39,090     | 30,204    | 32,343  | 17,159  | 33,202    | 35,659     | 57,735  | 57,400    |\n| Iotal County Allocations (A+B)                   | 362,095    | 346,704   | 409,880 | 392,359 | 431,787   | 429,427    | 485,666 | 495,693   |"},{"table_page":98,"section":"5.2 Risk in Changes in Macroeconomic Assumptions","markdown":"|                                       |   Revenue | Revenue   |   Revenue | Revenue   | Expenditures   | Expenditures   | Expenditures   | Expenditures   | Budget Balance   | Budget Balance   | Budget Balance   | Budget Balance   |\n|:--------------------------------------|----------:|:----------|----------:|:----------|:---------------|:---------------|:---------------|:---------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|\n| Reduction in real GDP [by 1.0 % point |      13.2 |           |      15.9 | 17.6      |                |                | 8.8            | 8.8            | 60               | 6.4              |                  |                  |\n| [Increase in inflation rate Point     |      20.4 | 29.6      |      32.9 | 36.6      | 11.7           | 17,0           | 18.7           | 18.7           | 8.               | 12.6             | 14.              |                  |\n| Depreciation in exchange              |     240   | 25.6      |      29.6 | 34,7      | 45             | 49             | 5.4            | 5.4            | 19.5             | 20.7             | 24.2             | 28.7             |\n| (USS) by 109 [goods (                 |     149   | 11        |      13   |           |                | 0,0            | 0,0            |                | 149              |                  | 13               |                  |\n| All shocks Combined                   |     460   | 39.3      |      44.8 | 51.6      | 8.5            |                | 14,7           | 14,7           |                  | 26.0             | 30.1             | 35.4             |"},{"table_page":100,"section":"Assessment of Past Forecast Accuracy of Underlying Assumptions and Budgetary Aggregates","markdown":"|                                | 2021/22.[Proj                  | 2021/22.Actual                 | 2021/22.                       | 2022/23.[Proj                  | 2022/23.Actual                 | 2022/23.Der,                   | 2023/24.Proj                   | 2023/24.Actual                 | 2023/24.                       | 2024/25.[Proj                  | 2024/25.Prel Actual   Der;     | 2024/25.                       | [2025/26.Proi                  | [2025/26.                      | Arerage Standard.              |\n|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------|\n| LKer Jacroeconomic Assumptions | LKer Jacroeconomic Assumptions | LKer Jacroeconomic Assumptions | LKer Jacroeconomic Assumptions | LKer Jacroeconomic Assumptions | LKer Jacroeconomic Assumptions | LKer Jacroeconomic Assumptions | LKer Jacroeconomic Assumptions | LKer Jacroeconomic Assumptions | LKer Jacroeconomic Assumptions | LKer Jacroeconomic Assumptions | LKer Jacroeconomic Assumptions | LKer Jacroeconomic Assumptions | LKer Jacroeconomic Assumptions | LKer Jacroeconomic Assumptions | LKer Jacroeconomic Assumptions |\n| Real GDP                       | 59%                            | 6.2%                           | 03%                            |                                | 5.2%                           |                                | 55%                            |                                | 03%                            | 509                            | 49%                            |                                | 51%                            | 0.09                           | 0.2%                           |\n| Inflation Rate (are)           | 5.69                           | 6.9%                           | 13%                            |                                |                                | 0.1%                           | 6.3%                           |                                |                                | 48%                            | 43%                            |                                | 45%                            | 0.1%                           |                                |\n| rate (Ksh USS), ae Exchange [  |                                | 1138                           |                                |                                | 139.7                          |                                |                                | 1294                           |                                |                                | 1293                           |                                |                                |                                |                                |\n|                                |                                |                                |                                |                                |                                |                                |                                | 10.4%                          |                                |                                | 2.8%                           |                                |                                |                                |                                |\n|                                |                                | 16.4%                          |                                |                                |                                |                                |                                | 059                            |                                |                                | 6.8%                           |                                |                                |                                |                                |\n| Total Revenue                  | 2,192                          | 2,200                          |                                | 2,479                          | 2,361                          |                                | 3,071                          | 2,703                          |                                | 2,986                          | 2,924                          | 62                             | 3,311                          |                                | 196                            |\n| Ordinary Revenue               | 1,852                          | 1918                           |                                | 2,145                          |                                | 104|                           | 2,625                          | 2,289                          | 336|                           | 2,496                          | 2,420                          |                                | 2,744                          | 112|                           | 183                            |\n| Aia                            | 340                            | 282                            |                                | 333                            | 319                            | 414                            | 446                            | 414                            |                                | 489                            | 503                            |                                |                                |                                | 35                             |\n| Grants                         | 63                             | 31                             | 32                             | 42                             | 23                             | 419                            |                                | 22                             | 225                            |                                | 33                             |                                |                                |                                | 23                             |\n| Total Expenditure              | 3,286                          | 3.028                          |                                |                                | 3,221                          | 146|                           | 3,903                          | 3,605                          |                                | 4045                           | 3,976                          |                                | 4,491                          | 193|                           | 213                            |\n| Recurrent                      | 2,227                          | 2,135                          | 92                             | 2,368                          | 2,312                          |                                | 2,760                          | 2,678                          | 82                             | 2,989                          | 2,948                          |                                | 3,328                          |                                | 71                             |\n| Derelopment                    | 658                            | 540                            |                                | 361                            | 494                            |                                | 718                            | 546                            |                                | 602                            | 583                            | 19                             | 676                            | 94                             | 110                            |\n| Domestic                       | 411                            | 378                            |                                |                                | 344                            |                                | 438                            | 377                            | 61                             | 395                            | 398                            |                                | 465                            |                                | 35                             |\n| External                       | 239                            | 162                            |                                | 194                            | 138                            | 561                            | 250                            | 152                            |                                | 185                            | 166                            | 19                             | 201                            |                                | 69                             |\n| Jet Lending                    |                                |                                |                                | 16                             | 12                             | 4                              | 19                             | 17                             |                                | 20                             | 20                             |                                |                                |                                | 2                              |\n| Equalization Fund              |                                |                                |                                | 14                             |                                | -14                            | 11                             |                                | -11                            |                                |                                |                                | 10                             |                                | 10                             |\n| County Allocation              | 401                            | 352                            | 49                             | 436                            | 416                            |                                | 424                            | 380                            | 43                             | 454                            | 445                            |                                | 485                            |                                | 35                             |\n| Balance                        | 1,031                          | 785                            | 246|                           | 846                            | 800                            |                                | 785                            | 835                            |                                | 1,012                          | 1,019                          |                                | 1,132                          | 59                             | 128                            |\n| |Financing                     | 1,031                          | 748                            | 283|                           | 846                            | 770                            |                                | 785                            | 818                            | 33                             | 1012                           | 1,034                          |                                |                                |                                | 148                            |\n| Jet Foreign Financing          | 343                            | 143                            | 201|                           | 363                            | 311                            | 52|                            | 362                            | 223                            |                                | 186                            | 180                            |                                | 195                            |                                | 125                            |\n| Jet Domestic Financing         |                                | 605                            | 83                             |                                |                                |                                | 423                            | 596                            | 173|                           | 826                            | 854                            |                                | 937                            | 24                             | 98                             |\n|                                | 688                            |                                |                                | 484                            | 460                            | 224                            |                                |                                |                                |                                |                                |                                |                                |                                |                                |\n|                                | 12,844                         | 12,698                         | 146]                           | 14,336                         | 14,299                         | 31                             | 16,132                         | 15,667                         | 465|                           | 17,435                         | 17,144                         | 291                            | 19,003                         |                                | 284                            |"},{"table_page":106,"section":"5.3.4 Climate Change Related Fiscal Risks to the Economy","markdown":"|         |   No. of Events | Total No. deaths   | Total No. affected   | Total damage (000' USD)   |\n|:--------|----------------:|:-------------------|:---------------------|:--------------------------|\n| Floods  |              64 | 2,647              | 5,983,149            | 710,524                   |\n| Drought |              18 | 196                | 61,450,000           | 251,500                   |"},{"table_page":108,"section":"5.3.4.2 Long Term Climate Change Fiscal Risks Analysis Using Q-CRAFT","markdown":"| Scenario.Scenario   | Description.Description                                                                                                                                                                                |   Temperature Change Degrees Celsius.2021-2050 |   Temperature Change Degrees Celsius.2021-2100 |\n|:--------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------:|-----------------------------------------------:|\n| Paris :             | It assumes that countries will maintain their current climate mitigation policies and will take additional actions to meet their Paris Agreement commitments.                                          |                                            1   |                                            1   |\n| Moderate :          | It assumes that countries will maintain their current climate mitigation policies but will not take additional actions to meet their Paris Agreement commitments.                                      |                                            1.2 |                                            1.6 |\n| High :              | Countries reduce their current climate mitigation efforts, resulting in limited energy efficiency enhancements and continued reliance on fossil fuels.                                                 |                                            1.4 |                                            2.2 |\n| Hot :               | This scenario follows the emissions path of the high scenario. However, it adopts the 90th percentile of temperature increase among all climate models rather than the average temperature projection. |                                            1.9 |                                            2.9 |"},{"table_page":115,"section":"ANNEX  1: ADHERENCE  TO  FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY PRINCIPLES","markdown":"|                                                                | FY 2023/24.Actual Budget Proj BPS'25 Ksh Billion   | FY 2024/25.Actual Budget Proj BPS'25 Ksh Billion   | FY 2025/26.Actual Budget Proj BPS'25 Ksh Billion   | FY 2025/26.Actual Budget Proj BPS'25 Ksh Billion   | FY 2026/27.Actual Budget Proj BPS'25 Ksh Billion   | FY 2027/28.Actual Budget Proj BPS'25 Ksh Billion   | Y2028/29.Actual Budget Proj BPS'25 Ksh Billion   | FY 2029/30.Actual Budget Proj BPS'25 Ksh Billion   |\n|:---------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|\n| 10 Total Expendihre & Net Lending                              |                                                    | 3,915.9                                            | 4,269.9                                            | 4,532.8                                            | 4,703.9                                            | 4,931.4                                            | 5,2416                                           |                                                    |\n| 1.1 Total Ministerial National Govt Expenses                   | 2,2143                                             | 2,331.8                                            |                                                    | 2,7493                                             | 2,831.8                                            | 3,022.7                                            | 3,2883                                           | 3,6350                                             |\n| Total Recurent                                                 | 2,678.4                                            |                                                    | 3,1420                                             |                                                    | 3,471.2                                            | 3,569.0                                            | 3,7123                                           | 4,018.3                                            |\n| CFS (Interest & Pensions)                                      | 1,018.8                                            | 1,2062                                             | 1,3373                                             | 1,3665                                             | 1,450.1                                            | 1,4629                                             | 1,491.7                                          | 1,5456                                             |\n| Ministerial Recurrent                                          | 1,659.6                                            | 1,7473                                             | 1,804.7                                            | 1,980.1                                            | 2,021.1                                            | 2,106.2                                            | 2,2146                                           | 2,472.7                                            |\n| & Salaries                                                     | 5153                                               | 624.7                                              | 6573                                               |                                                    | 720.7                                              | 1524                                               | 790.0                                            | 8295                                               |\n| Net Lending                                                    | 174                                                | 19.7                                               |                                                    |                                                    |                                                    |                                                    |                                                  |                                                    |\n| Wages as % National Government Revenues                        |                                                    | 24.9%|                                             | 22.6%                                              | 23.9%                                              | 23.1%                                              | 20.9%|                                             | 20.3%                                            | 19.6%                                              |\n| Development                                                    | 554.7                                              | 5843                                               | 710.8                                              |                                                    | 810.7                                              | 9165                                               | 1,073.9                                          | 1,1623                                             |\n| [Development as % Jinisterial National Goverument expenditures | 25.1%|                                             | 25.1%|                                             | 28.3%                                              |                                                    | 28.6%|                                             | 30.3% |                                            |                                                  | 32.0%                                              |\n| 1.2 County Allocation                                          | 380.4                                              | 444.6                                              | 484.8                                              | 484.8                                              | 4955                                               | 4735                                               | 483.0                                            | 509.4                                              |\n| Equtable sharë                                                 | 354.6                                              | 418.3                                              | 415.0                                              | 415.0                                              | 420.0                                              | 440.9                                              | 450.4                                            | 476.7                                              |\n| Conditional Grants                                             | 25.8                                               | 263                                                | 69.8                                               | 69.8                                               |                                                    |                                                    | 327                                              | 32.7                                               |\n| Contigency Fund                                                |                                                    |                                                    | 20                                                 | 20                                                 | 20                                                 | 50                                                 | 50                                               | 50                                                 |\n| [2.0 Total Revenues                                            |                                                    | 2,923.6                                            | 3,3217                                             | 3,3521                                             | 3,533.7                                            | 4,038.9                                            |                                                  | 4,6993                                             |\n|                                                                | 2,348.1                                            | 2,5053                                             | 2,906.7                                            | 2,937.1                                            | 3,113.7                                            | 3,598.0                                            | 3,886.8                                          | 4,2228                                             |\n| 4.0 Jational Government Domestic Borrowing (net)               | 595.6                                              | 8543                                               | 6133                                               | 885.9                                              | 890.4                                              | 545.9                                              | 684.0                                            | 7314                                               |"},{"table_page":118,"section":"iv) Maintenance of Public debt and Obligations at a Sustainable Level","markdown":"| Indicators.                               |   Threshold. |   2024.Actual |   2025.Projection |   2026.Projection |   2027.Projection |   2028.Projection |   2029.Projection |   2030.Projection |\n|:------------------------------------------|-------------:|--------------:|------------------:|------------------:|------------------:|------------------:|------------------:|------------------:|\n| PV of PPG external debt- to-GDP ratio     |           40 |          30.8 |              28.3 |              27.5 |              26.8 |              25.5 |              24.4 |              24.6 |\n| PV of PPG external debt- to-exports ratio |          180 |         180.3 |             182.2 |             167.5 |             158.7 |             147.9 |             141.6 |             145.1 |\n| PPG debt service-to- exports ratio        |           15 |          26.3 |              22.5 |              18.3 |              15.9 |              18.3 |              15.9 |              15.9 |\n| PPG debt service-to- revenue ratio        |           18 |          27   |              20.6 |              17.6 |              15.5 |              18.3 |              16.1 |              16.2 |"},{"table_page":118,"section":"iv) Maintenance of Public debt and Obligations at a Sustainable Level","markdown":"| Indicators.                          | Benchmark.   |   2024.Actual |   2025. |   2026. |   2027. |   2028. |   2029. |   2030. |\n|:-------------------------------------|:-------------|--------------:|--------:|--------:|--------:|--------:|--------:|--------:|\n| PV of debt - to-GDP ratio            | 55           |          65.7 |    65.3 |    65.6 |    65   |    64.2 |    61.3 |    62.1 |\n| PV of public debt-to- revenue grants |              |         391.5 |   379.8 |   379   |   369.5 |   365   |   367.1 |   365.1 |"},{"table_page":120,"section":"vi) Compliance with the Requirement to Maintain a Reasonable Degree of Predictability with respect to the Level of Tax Rates and Tax Bases","markdown":"|                                                                    | 2023/24.Act..otherwise indicated                 | 2024/25.Prel..otherwise indicated                | 2025/26.Budget.otherwise indicated               | 2025/26.Proj..otherwise indicated                | 2026/27.BROP 2025.otherwise indicated            | 2026/27.BPS 2026.otherwise indicated             | 2027/28.BROP 2025.otherwise indicated            | 2027/28.BPS 2026.otherwise indicated             | 2028/29.BROP 2025.otherwise indicated            | 2028/29.BPS 2026.otherwise indicated             | 2029/30.BROP 2025.otherwise indicated            | 2029/30.BPS 2026.otherwise indicated             |\n|:-------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|\n|                                                                    | annual                                           | percentage                                       | change, unless                                   |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |\n| National Account and Prices Real GDP                               | 5.2                                              | 4.9                                              | 5.3                                              | 5.1                                              | 5.3                                              | 5.3                                              | 5.3                                              | 5.3                                              | 5.3                                              | 5.3                                              | 5.3                                              | 5.3                                              |\n| GDP Deflator                                                       | 4.2                                              | 4.3                                              | 5.5                                              | 5.3                                              | 5.4                                              | 5.5                                              | 5.3                                              | 5.4                                              | 5.3                                              | 5.3                                              | 5.3                                              | 5.3                                              |\n| CPI Index (eop)                                                    | 5.2                                              | 4.4                                              | 4.7                                              | 4.8                                              | 4.8                                              | 4.9                                              | 4.7                                              | 4.8                                              | 4.7                                              | 4.7                                              | 4.8                                              | 4.8                                              |\n| CPI Index (avg)                                                    | 6.1                                              | 4.3                                              | 4.7                                              | 4.5                                              | 4.8                                              | 5.0                                              | 4.8                                              | 4.9                                              | 4.7                                              | 4.7                                              | 4.7                                              | 4.7                                              |\n| Terms of Trade (-deterioration)                                    | -1.1                                             | 1.7                                              | 3.7                                              | 3.1                                              | 3.2                                              | 2.7                                              | 3.5                                              | 3.2                                              | 4.0                                              | 3.5                                              | 4.5                                              | 3.8                                              |\n| Money and Credit (end of period)                                   |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |\n| Net domestic assets                                                | -0.2                                             | 6.4                                              | 13.4                                             | 12.4                                             | 10.4                                             | 9.2                                              | 9.9                                              | 8.4                                              | 9.4                                              | 8.6                                              | 9.2                                              | 8.7                                              |\n| Net domestic credit to the Government                              | 7.9                                              | 20.0                                             | 6.0                                              | 8.7                                              | 7.2                                              | 8.0                                              | 5.4                                              | 4.5                                              | 5.3                                              | 5.4                                              | 5.5                                              | 5.6                                              |\n| Credit to the rest of the economy                                  | 4.0                                              | 2.2                                              | 8.5                                              | 5.5                                              | 10.6                                             | 8.5                                              | 11.1                                             | 10.0                                             | 10.7                                             | 9.6                                              | 10.3                                             | 9.7                                              |\n| Broad Money, M3 (percent change)                                   | 6.8                                              | 7.5                                              | 10.8                                             | 10.8                                             | 10.2                                             | 10.2                                             | 10.4                                             | 10.2                                             | 10.4                                             | 10.2                                             | 10.3                                             | 10.1                                             |\n| Reserve money(percent change)                                      | 18.7                                             | -1.3                                             | 8.2                                              | 8.3                                              | 10.1                                             | 10.1                                             | 10.3                                             | 10.1                                             | 10.3                                             | 10.1                                             | 10.2                                             | 10.0                                             |\n| in percentage of GDP, unless otherwise indicated                   | in percentage of GDP, unless otherwise indicated | in percentage of GDP, unless otherwise indicated | in percentage of GDP, unless otherwise indicated | in percentage of GDP, unless otherwise indicated | in percentage of GDP, unless otherwise indicated | in percentage of GDP, unless otherwise indicated | in percentage of GDP, unless otherwise indicated | in percentage of GDP, unless otherwise indicated | in percentage of GDP, unless otherwise indicated | in percentage of GDP, unless otherwise indicated | in percentage of GDP, unless otherwise indicated | in percentage of GDP, unless otherwise indicated |\n| Investment and Saving                                              |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |\n| Investment                                                         | 16.6                                             | 15.6                                             | 15.6                                             | 15.0                                             | 15.6                                             | 15.5                                             | 15.6                                             | 15.6                                             | 15.6                                             | 15.7                                             | 16.5                                             | 16.6                                             |\n| Central Government                                                 | 4.2                                              | 4.1                                              | 4.2                                              | 4.2                                              | 4.2                                              | 4.2                                              | 4.4                                              | 4.4                                              | 4.6                                              | 4.7                                              | 4.5                                              | 4.5                                              |\n| Private                                                            | 12.4                                             | 11.5                                             | 11.3                                             | 10.8                                             | 11.4                                             | 11.2                                             | 11.1                                             | 11.1                                             | 11.0                                             | 11.0                                             | 12.0                                             | 12.0                                             |\n| Gross National                                                     | 14.7                                             | 13.8                                             | 14.1                                             | 12.6                                             | 14.1                                             | 12.9                                             | 13.9                                             | 12.9                                             | 13.9                                             | 13.0                                             | 16.7                                             | 14.0                                             |\n| Savings Central Government                                         | -1.6                                             | -2.0                                             | -0.7                                             | -1.6                                             | -0.9                                             | -1.2                                             | 0.4                                              | 0.5                                              | 0.9                                              | 1.0                                              | 1.3                                              | 1.1                                              |\n| Private                                                            | 16.4                                             | 15.8                                             | 14.9                                             | 14.3                                             | 15.1                                             | 14.1                                             | 13.6                                             | 12.4                                             | 13.0                                             | 12.0                                             | 15.4                                             | 12.9                                             |\n| Central Government Budget                                          |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |\n| Total revenue                                                      | 17.3                                             | 17.1                                             | 17.2                                             | 17.6                                             | 17.1                                             | 16.9                                             | 17.5                                             | 17.5                                             | 17.1                                             | 17.0                                             | 16.7                                             | 16.8                                             |\n| Total expenditure and net lending                                  | 23.0                                             | 23.2                                             | 22.2                                             | 23.9                                             | 22.2                                             | 22.5                                             | 21.5                                             | 21.4                                             | 20.8                                             | 20.6                                             | 19.8                                             | 20.2                                             |\n| Overall Fiscal balance excl. grants                                | -5.8                                             | -6.1                                             | -4.9                                             | -6.2                                             | -5.1                                             | -5.6                                             | -4.0                                             | -3.9                                             | -3.7                                             | -3.6                                             | -3.1                                             | -3.4                                             |\n| Overall Fiscal balance, incl. grants, cash basis                   | -5.3                                             | -5.9                                             | -4.7                                             | -6.0                                             | -4.9                                             | -5.3                                             | -3.7                                             | -3.6                                             | -3.4                                             | -3.3                                             | -2.9                                             | -3.2                                             |\n| Statistical discrepancy                                            | -0.1                                             | 0.1                                              | 0.0                                              | 0.0                                              | 0.0                                              | 0.0                                              | 0.0                                              | 0.0                                              | 0.0                                              | 0.0                                              | 0.0                                              | 0.0                                              |\n| Overall Fiscal balance, incl. grants, cash basis- adj. descrepancy | -5.3                                             | -5.9                                             | -4.7                                             | -6.0                                             | -4.9                                             | -5.3                                             | -3.7                                             | -3.6                                             | -3.4                                             | -3.3                                             | -2.9                                             | -3.2                                             |\n| Primary budget balance                                             | 0.0                                              | -0.1                                             | 1.0                                              | -0.1                                             | 0.8                                              | 0.4                                              | 1.6                                              | 1.6                                              | 1.5                                              | 1.6                                              | 1.4                                              | 1.4                                              |\n| Net domestic borrowing                                             | 3.8                                              | 5.0                                              | 3.2                                              | 4.7                                              | 4.4                                              | 4.3                                              | 2.7                                              | 2.4                                              | 2.5                                              | 2.7                                              | 2.5                                              | 2.6                                              |\n| External Sector                                                    |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |\n| Exports value, goods and services                                  | 17.0                                             | 16.1                                             | 14.9                                             | 14.9                                             | 13.9                                             | 14.4                                             | 12.9                                             | 14.1                                             | 12.3                                             | 13.9                                             | 13.8                                             | 13.7                                             |\n| Imports value, goods and services                                  | 23.7                                             | 22.5                                             | 20.2                                             | 21.2                                             | 18.7                                             | 20.3                                             | 17.4                                             | 19.7                                             | 16.4                                             | 19.1                                             | 15.7                                             | 18.4                                             |\n| Current external balance, including official transfers             | -1.9                                             | -1.8                                             | -1.4                                             | -2.4                                             | -1.5                                             | -2.6                                             | -1.6                                             | -2.7                                             | -1.7                                             | -2.6                                             | 0.2                                              | -2.6                                             |\n| Gross reserves in months of next yr's imports                      | 3.8                                              | 5.1                                              | 5.0                                              | 4.8                                              | 5.0                                              | 4.8                                              | 5.0                                              | 4.9                                              | 5.1                                              | 5.0                                              | 5.1                                              | 5.2                                              |\n| Gross reserves in months of this yr's imports                      | 4.1                                              | 5.4                                              | 5.1                                              | 5.1                                              | 5.2                                              | 5.2                                              | 5.3                                              | 5.3                                              | 5.4                                              | 5.4                                              | 5.5                                              | 5.5                                              |\n| Public debt                                                        |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |\n| Nominal central government debt (eop), gross                       | 67.5                                             | 68.9                                             | 66.9                                             | 68.2                                             | 65.5                                             | 67.2                                             | 63.1                                             | 64.6                                             | 60.6                                             | 61.8                                             | 57.8                                             | 59.3                                             |\n| Nominal debt (eop), net of deposits                                | 64.2                                             | 65.4                                             | 63.8                                             | 65.0                                             | 62.7                                             | 64.3                                             | 60.6                                             | 62.0                                             | 58.3                                             | 59.5                                             | 55.7                                             | 57.2                                             |\n| Domestic (gross)                                                   | 34.5                                             | 36.9                                             | 36.5                                             | 38.0                                             | 36.8                                             | 38.7                                             | 36.1                                             | 37.5                                             | 35.2                                             | 36.7                                             | 34.4                                             | 35.9                                             |\n| Domestic (net)                                                     | 31.2                                             | 33.5                                             | 33.4                                             | 34.8                                             | 34.0                                             | 35.9                                             | 33.5                                             | 34.9                                             | 32.9                                             | 34.4                                             | 32.3                                             | 33.8                                             |\n| External                                                           | 33.0                                             | 32.0                                             | 30.4                                             | 30.2                                             | 28.7                                             | 28.5                                             | 27.0                                             | 27.1                                             | 25.4                                             | 25.2                                             | 23.3                                             | 23.4                                             |\n| Memorandum Items:                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |\n| Nominal GDP (in Ksh Billion)                                       | 15,667                                           | 17,144                                           | 19,273                                           | 19,003                                           | 20,954                                           | 20,947                                           | 23,126                                           | 23,082                                           | 25,527                                           | 25,447                                           | 28,158                                           | 28,024                                           |\n| Nominal GDP (in US$ Million)                                       | 114,501                                          | 130,405                                          | 146,947                                          | 147,148                                          | 162,101                                          | 161,987                                          | 179,205                                          | 177,919                                          | 198,278                                          | 195,809                                          | 219,156                                          | 215,992                                          |"},{"table_page":121,"section":"vi) Compliance with the Requirement to Maintain a Reasonable Degree of Predictability with respect to the Level of Tax Rates and Tax Bases","markdown":"|                                                                                     | 2023/24.Act.   | 2024/25.Prel.   | 2025/26.Budget   | 2025/26.Proj.   | 2026/27.BROP 2025   | 2026/27.BPS 2026   | 2027/28.BROP 2025   | 2027/28.BPS 2026   | 2028/29.BROP 2025   | 2028/29.BPS 2026   | 2029/30.BROP 2025   | 2029/30.BPS 2026   | 2029/30.BPS 2026   |\n|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------|:----------------|:-----------------|:----------------|:--------------------|:-------------------|:--------------------|:-------------------|:--------------------|:-------------------|:--------------------|:-------------------|:-------------------|\n| TOTAL REVENUE                                                                       | 2,702.7        | 2,923.6         | 3,321.7          | 3,352.1         | 3,583.4             | 3,533.7            | 4,044.3             | 4,038.9            | 4,368.4             | 4,337.2            | 4,697.1             | 4,699.5            | 4,699.5            |\n| Ordinary Revenue (Tax+Non-Tax Revenue)                                              | 2,288.9        | 2,420.2         | 2,754.7          | 2,744.4         | 2,998.3             | 2,901.9            | 3,387.9             | 3,390.0            | 3,655.8             | 3,658.0            | 3,955.2             | 3,957.6            | 3,957.6            |\n| Tax Revenue                                                                         | 2,167.8        | 2,272.4         | 2,627.1          | 2,600.8         | 2,683.6             | 2,767.4            | 3,096.8             | 3,099.0            | 3,371.8             | 3,374.0            | 3,703.1             | 3,705.5            | 3,705.5            |\n| Income Tax Import duty (net)                                                        | 1,042.8        | 1,093.0         | 1,284.8 162.9    | 1,266.8 167.0   | 1,288.4             | 1,321.6            | 1,484.9             | 1,484.9            | 1,619.2             | 1,619.2            | 1,775.5             | 1,775.5 220.0      | 1,775.5 220.0      |\n| Excise duty                                                                         | 133.9 276.7    | 157.1 292.5     | 335.5            | 323.1           | 177.2 358.8         | 185.2 349.9        | 191.8 397.0         | 194.0 397.0        | 203.2 440.5         | 205.4 440.5        | 217.6 488.8         | 488.8              | 488.8              |\n| Value Added Tax                                                                     | 645.5          | 660.7           | 771.7            | 771.7           | 781.8               | 833.4              | 941.3               | 941.3              | 1,021.0             | 1,021.0            | 1,127.6             | 1,127.6            | 1,127.6            |\n| Other Tax Revenue                                                                   | 68.9           | 69.1            | 72.2             | 72.2            | 77.4                | 77.4               | 81.9                | 81.9 291.1         | 87.9 284.0          | 87.9 284.0         | 93.6 252.1          | 93.6 252.1         | 93.6 252.1         |\n| Non-Tax Revenue Ministerial                                                         | 121.1 413.7    | 147.8 503.4     | 127.6 566.9      | 143.6 607.7     | 314.6 585.1         | 134.5 631.8        | 291.1 656.4         | 648.9              | 712.6               | 679.2              | 741.8               | 741.8              | 741.8              |\n| Appropriation in Aid Railway Development Levy                                       | 32.0           | 36.8            | 40.7             | 40.7            | 45.0                | 45.0               | 49.7                | 49.7               | 54.9                | 54.9               | 60.7                | 60.7               | 60.7               |\n| African Union &Int't Subscription Fund                                              | 5.4            | 5.2             | 6.6              | 6.6             | 6.4 224.9           | 6.4 246.7          | 7.0 268.8           | 7.0 261.3          | 7.8 295.5           | 7.8 262.1          | 8.6 297.5           | 8.6 297.5          | 8.6 297.5          |\n| Recurrent Road Maintenance Levy - Normal                                            | 259.5          | 199.7 73.3      | 231.9 70.2       | 254.4 70.2      | 84.1                | 84.1               | 88.7                | 88.7               | 93.5                | 93.5               | 98.5                | 98.5               | 98.5               |\n| NMS- Recurrent                                                                      | 0.0            | 22.5            | 25.5             | 25.5            | 25.3                | 25.3               | 26.6                | 26.6               | 28.1                | 28.1               | 29.7                | 29.7               | 29.7               |\n| PDL- Recurrent                                                                      | 22.0           | 42.4            | 45.1             | 63.4            | 56.4                | 81.3               | 59.1                | 59.1               | 61.9                | 61.9               | 60.0                | 60.0               | 60.0               |\n| NMS- Development                                                                    | 0.0            | 14.1            | 14.4             | 14.4            | 15.1                | 15.1               | 15.9                | 15.9               | 16.6                | 16.6               | 17.5                | 17.5               | 17.5               |\n| PDL- Development                                                                    | 2.3            | 32.2            | 32.0             | 32.0            | 33.1                | 33.1               | 34.9                | 34.9               | 36.7                | 36.7               | 38.7                | 38.7               | 38.7               |\n| Housing Development Levy                                                            | 54.2           | 73.2            | 95.0             | 95.0            | 91.1                | 91.1               | 101.6               | 101.6              | 113.3               | 113.3              | 126.4               | 126.4              | 126.4              |\n| EXPENDITURE ANDNETLENDING                                                           | 3,605.2        | 3,975.9         | 4,269.9          | 4,532.8         | 4,649.7             | 4,703.9            | 4,969.7             | 4,931.4            | 5,304.6             | 5,241.6            | 5,580.9             | 5,662.3            | 5,662.3            |\n| Recurrent expenditure                                                               | 2,678.4        | 2,948.4         | 3,134.1          | 3,338.7         | 3,437.1             | 3,456.9            | 3,607.4             | 3,569.0            | 3,775.3             | 3,712.3            | 3,946.8             | 4,018.3            | 4,018.3            |\n| Interest payments Domestic interest                                                 | 840.7 622.5    | 995.1 784.1     | 1,097.7 851.4    | 1,126.5 883.8   | 1,193.4 961.1       | 1,203.1 956.4      | 1,234.3 984.4       | 1,203.4 953.5      | 1,261.3 1,008.0     | 1,231.8 978.5      | 1,198.3 950.8       | 1,269.8 1,022.3    | 1,269.8 1,022.3    |\n| Foreign Interest                                                                    | 218.2          | 211.0           | 246.3            | 242.8           | 232.3               | 246.6              | 249.9               | 249.9              | 253.2               | 253.2              | 247.5               | 247.5              | 247.5              |\n| Pensions &Other CFS Pensions                                                        | 143.9 140.6    | 176.8           | 205.2            | 205.6 200.5     | 211.2 206.5         | 207.5 202.4        | 218.7 213.9         | 218.7 213.9        | 224.0 219.3         | 224.0 219.3        | 232.1 227.2         | 232.1 227.2        | 232.1 227.2        |\n| Other CFS                                                                           | 3.3            | 172.9           | 200.5 4.7        | 5.1             | 4.7                 | 5.1                | 4.7                 | 4.7                | 4.7                 | 4.7                | 5.0                 | 5.0                | 5.0                |\n| Contribution to Civil Fund                                                          | 34.2           | 3.9 34.3        | 34.4             | 34.4            | 39.6                | 39.6               | 40.8                | 40.8               | 42.0                | 42.0               | 43.7                | 43.7               | 43.7               |\n| Service Pension Net Issues/Net Expenditure                                          | 1,372.7        | 1,441.5         | 1,462.5          | 1,615.4         | 1,652.3 710.1       | 1,644.3 720.7      | 1,722.4 752.4       | 1,722.4 752.4      | 1,823.2 790.0       | 1,823.2            | 2,038.5 829.5       | 2,038.5 829.5      | 2,038.5 829.5      |\n| O/W: Wages &Salaries                                                                | 575.3          | 624.7           | 657.3            | 701.7           |                     |                    |                     |                    | 82.3                | 790.0              |                     | 82.3               | 82.3               |\n| Free Secondary education Free Primary Education                                     | 70.2 11.3      | 54.6            | 54.9 7.9         | 54.9            | 57.7                | 60.9 8.2           | 79.1 14.7           | 79.1 14.7          | 15.3                | 82.3 15.3          | 82.3 15.3           | 15.3               | 15.3               |\n| Junior Secondary School - Capitation IEBC                                           | 30.5           | 30.4 7.6        | 30.9             | 7.9 30.9        | 8.2 31.9            | 31.9               | 41.5                | 41.5               | 43.1                | 43.1               | 43.1                | 43.1 29.2          | 43.1 29.2          |\n| Defense and NIS                                                                     | 4.6 205.4      | 3.9 231.4       | 5.9              | 5.9             | 16.4 245.0          | 15.5 283.9         | 16.4 251.1          | 16.4 291.0         | 29.2 257.4          | 29.2 298.2         | 29.2 263.8          |                    |                    |\n| Others                                                                              | 475.9          | 465.6           | 241.0 439.0      | 264.1 504.7     | 552.1               | 492.5              | 529.7 391.2         | 489.8              | 568.3               | 527.5              | 737.7 434.2         | 263.8 737.7        | 263.8 737.7        |\n| Ministerial Recurrent AIA Development and Net lending                               | 286.9 546.4    | 300.8 582.9     | 334.3 649.0      | 356.7 707.3     | 340.7 761.0         | 362.5 749.5        | 883.8               | 383.7 883.8        | 424.9 1,041.2       | 391.4 1,041.2      | 1,119.7             | 434.2 1,129.7      | 434.2 1,129.7      |\n| Domestically financed (Gross) O/WDomestically Financed (Net)/NMS                    | 377.0          | 397.7           | 437.9            | 495.9           | 496.8               | 510.3              | 580.2 349.9         | 580.2              | 676.7 425.7         | 676.7              | 759.6 490.7         | 759.6 490.7        | 759.6 490.7        |\n| Ministerial Development AIA                                                         | 250.2 197.2    | 227.3           | 237.2 200.7      | 276.9           | 285.4 211.4         | 274.0 236.3        | 230.3               | 349.9 230.3        | 251.1               | 425.7 251.1        | 269.0               | 269.0              | 269.0              |\n| Foreign financed                                                                    | 151.9          | 170.4           | 201.5            | 219.0 201.8     | 249.1               | 224.1              | 0.0                 |                    | 341.9               | 341.9              | 336.9               | 0.0                | 0.0                |\n| Net lending                                                                         | 17.4           | 165.6 19.7      | 0.0              | 0.0             | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 285.0               | 285.0 0.0          | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 0.0                 | 346.9              | 346.9              |\n| Equalization Fund                                                                   | 0.0            | 0.0             | 9.6              | 9.6             | 15.2                | 15.2               | 18.6                | 18.6               | 22.6                | 22.6               | 23.1                |                    |                    |\n| County Tranfers                                                                     | 380.4          | 444.6           | 484.8            | 484.8           | 446.6               |                    | 473.5               |                    | 483.0               | 483.0              | 509.4               | 23.1               | 23.1               |\n| Equitable Share                                                                     | 354.6          | 418.3           | 415.0            | 415.0           | 420.0               | 495.5 420.0        | 440.9               | 473.5 440.9        | 450.4               | 450.4              | 476.7               | 509.4              | 509.4              |\n| Conditional Allocation Contingency Fund                                             | 25.8 0.0       | 26.3 0.0        | 69.8 2.0         | 69.8 2.0        | 26.6 5.0            | 75.5 2.0           | 32.7 5.0            | 32.7 5.0           | 32.7 5.0            | 32.7 5.0           | 32.7 5.0            | 476.7 32.7         | 476.7 32.7         |\n| Fiscal Balance (commitment basis excl. grants)                                      | -902.5         | -1,052.4        | -948.2           | -1,180.7        | -1,066.4            | -1,170.2           | -925.5              | -892.5             | -936.1              | -904.4             | -883.8              | 5.0 -962.9         | 5.0 -962.9         |\n| Grants SGR                                                                          | 22.0 -880.5    | 33.3            | 47.2             | 39.9            | 48.8                | 54.4               | 58.8                | 58.8 -833.7        | 67.1 -869.1         | 67.1 -837.3        | 77.1 -806.7         | 77.1 -885.8        | 77.1 -885.8        |\n| Fiscal Balance (cash basis incl. grants) Exl. Adjustment to Cash Basis              | 45.4           | -1,019.1 0.0    | -901.0 0.0       | -1,140.7 0.0    | -1,017.6 0.0        | -1,115.8 0.0       | -866.6 0.0          | 0.0                | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 0.0                |\n|                                                                                     |                |                 |                  |                 |                     |                    | -866.6              |                    | -869.1              |                    |                     | -885.8             | -885.8             |\n| Fiscal Balance (incl. grants) Cash Basis Statistical discrepancy                    | -835.1 -16.8   | -1,019.1 15.1   | -901.0 0.0       | -1,140.7 0.0    | -1,017.6 0.0        | -1,115.8 0.0       | 0.0                 | -833.7 0.0         | 0.0                 | -837.3 0.0         | -806.7 0.0          | 0.0                | 0.0                |\n|                                                                                     | 818.3          | 1,034.2         | 901.0            | 1,140.7         | 1,017.6             | 1,115.8            | 866.6               | 833.7              | 869.1               | 837.3              | 806.7               |                    |                    |\n| TOTAL FINANCING                                                                     |                |                 |                  |                 |                     |                    |                     |                    |                     |                    |                     | 885.8              | 885.8              |\n| Net Foreign Financing                                                               | 222.7 760.5    | 179.7 527.0     | 287.4 627.6      | 254.8           | 99.5 564.3          | 225.5              | 235.9 674.7         | 287.8              | 225.1 639.3         | 153.3 639.3        | 98.0 685.0          | 148.3 634.3 140.0  | 148.3 634.3 140.0  |\n| Disbuserments Commercial Financing                                                  | 286.9          | 253.1           | 221.2 0.0        | 937.5 579.4     | 145.6               | 564.5              | 0.0                 | 674.7              | 140.0 0.0           | 140.0 0.0          | 200.7 0.0           | 0.0                | 0.0                |\n| of which: External Debt Operations - Refinancing Total Project loans (AIA+ Revenue) | 0.0 155.8 68.3 | 188.3 151.4     | 211.2            | 150.5 218.8     | 0.0 226.9           | 145.6 0.0          | 224.1 258.8         | 224.1 0.0 258.8    | 307.5               | 307.5              | 292.5 135.3         |                    |                    |\n| o/w: Project loans (AIA)                                                            | 87.4           | 65.6 85.8       | 86.5 124.6       | 95.7            | 100.6 126.2         | 227.0 100.8 126.2  | 123.3 135.6         | 123.3 135.6        | 140.3 167.2         | 140.3 167.2        | 157.2 0.0           | 0.0                | 0.0                |\n| Project Loans Revenue Use of IMF SDR Allocation OPEC Funds                          | 0.0            | 0.0             | 0.0 0.0          | 123.1 0.0 8.5   | 0.0 0.0             | 0.0 0.0            | 0.0 0.0             | 0.0 0.0            | 0.0 0.0             | 0.0                | 0.0                 | 302.5 0.0          | 302.5 0.0          |"},{"table_page":122,"section":"vi) Compliance with the Requirement to Maintain a Reasonable Degree of Predictability with respect to the Level of Tax Rates and Tax Bases","markdown":"|                                                                       | 2023/24.Act.   | 2024/25.Prel.   | 2025/26.Budget   | 2025/26.Proj.   | 2026/27.BROP 2025   | 2026/27.BPS 2026   | 2027/28.BROP 2025   | 2027/28.BPS 2026   | 2028/29.BROP 2025   | 2028/29.BPS 2026   | 2029/30.BROP 2025   | 2029/30.BPS 2026   | 2029/30.BPS 2026   |\n|:----------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------|:----------------|:-----------------|:----------------|:--------------------|:-------------------|:--------------------|:-------------------|:--------------------|:-------------------|:--------------------|:-------------------|:-------------------|\n| TOTAL REVENUE                                                         | 17.3           | 17.1            | 17.2             | 17.6            | 17.1                | 16.9               | 17.5                | 17.5               | 17.1                | 17.0               | 16.7                | 16.8               | 16.8               |\n| Ordinary Revenue (Tax+Non-Tax Revenue)                                | 14.6           | 14.1            | 14.3             | 14.4            | 14.3                | 13.9               | 14.6                | 14.7               | 14.3                | 14.4               | 14.0                | 14.1               | 14.1               |\n| Tax Revenue                                                           | 13.8           | 13.3            | 13.6             | 13.7            | 12.8                | 13.2               | 13.4                | 13.4               | 13.2                | 13.3               | 13.2                | 13.2               | 13.2               |\n| Income Tax                                                            | 6.7            | 6.4             | 6.7              | 6.7 0.9         | 6.1                 | 6.3                | 6.4                 | 6.4                | 6.3                 | 6.4                | 6.3                 | 6.3                | 6.3                |\n| Import duty (net)                                                     | 0.9            | 0.9 1.7         | 0.8 1.7          | 1.7             | 0.8 1.7             | 0.9 1.7            | 0.8 1.7             | 0.8 1.7            | 0.8 1.7             | 0.8 1.7            | 0.8 1.7             | 0.8 1.7            | 0.8 1.7            |\n| Excise duty Value Added Tax                                           | 1.8 4.1        | 3.9             | 4.0              | 4.1             | 3.7                 | 4.0                | 4.1                 | 4.1                | 4.0                 | 4.0                | 4.0                 | 4.0                | 4.0                |\n| Other Tax Revenue                                                     | 0.4            | 0.4             | 0.4              | 0.4             | 0.4                 | 0.4                | 0.4                 | 0.4                | 0.3                 | 0.3                | 0.3                 | 0.3                | 0.3                |\n| Non-Tax Revenue                                                       | 0.8            | 0.9             | 0.7              | 0.8             | 1.5                 | 0.6 3.0            | 1.3 2.8             | 1.3 2.8            | 1.1 2.8             | 1.1 2.7            | 0.9 2.6             | 0.9 2.6            | 0.9 2.6            |\n| Ministerial Appropriation in Aid                                      | 2.6            | 2.9 0.2         | 2.9 0.2          | 3.2 0.2         | 2.8 0.2             | 0.2                | 0.2                 | 0.2                | 0.2                 | 0.2                | 0.2                 | 0.2                | 0.2                |\n| Railway Development Levy African Union &Int't Subscription Fund       | 0.2 0.0        | 0.0             | 0.0              | 0.0             | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 0.0                |\n| Recurrent                                                             | 1.7            | 1.2             | 1.2              | 1.3             | 1.1                 | 1.2                | 1.2                 | 1.1                | 1.2                 | 1.0                | 1.1                 | 1.1                | 1.1                |\n| Road Maintenance Levy - Normal                                        | 0.0            | 0.4             | 0.4              | 0.4             | 0.4                 | 0.4                | 0.4 0.1             | 0.4 0.1            | 0.4 0.1             | 0.4                | 0.3                 | 0.4                | 0.4                |\n| NMS- Recurrent PDL- Recurrent                                         | 0.0 0.1        | 0.1 0.2         | 0.1 0.2          | 0.1 0.3         | 0.1 0.3             | 0.1 0.4            | 0.3                 | 0.3                | 0.2                 | 0.1 0.2            | 0.1 0.2             | 0.1 0.2            | 0.1 0.2            |\n| NMS- Development                                                      | 0.0            | 0.1             | 0.1              | 0.1             | 0.1                 | 0.1                | 0.1                 | 0.1                | 0.1                 | 0.1                | 0.1                 | 0.1                | 0.1                |\n| PDL- Development                                                      | 0.0            | 0.2             | 0.2              | 0.2             | 0.2                 | 0.2                | 0.2                 | 0.2                | 0.1                 | 0.1                | 0.1                 | 0.1                | 0.1                |\n| Housing Development Levy                                              | 0.3            | 0.4             | 0.5              | 0.5             | 0.4                 | 0.4                | 0.4                 | 0.4                | 0.4                 | 0.4                | 0.4                 | 0.5                | 0.5                |\n| EXPENDITURE ANDNETLENDING Recurrent expenditure                       | 23.0 17.1      | 23.2            | 22.2 16.3        | 23.9 17.6       | 22.2 16.4           | 22.5 16.5          | 21.5 15.6           | 21.4 15.5          | 20.8 14.8           | 20.6 14.6          | 19.8 14.0           | 20.2               | 14.3               |\n| Interest payments                                                     | 5.4            | 17.2 5.8        | 5.7              | 5.9             | 5.7                 | 5.7                | 5.3                 | 5.2                | 4.9                 | 4.8                | 4.3                 | 4.5                | 4.5                |\n| Domestic interest                                                     | 4.0            | 4.6             | 4.4              | 4.7             | 4.6                 | 4.6                | 4.3                 | 4.1                | 3.9                 | 3.8                | 3.4                 | 3.6                | 3.6                |\n| Foreign Interest                                                      | 1.4            | 1.2             | 1.3              | 1.3             | 1.1                 | 1.2                | 1.1                 | 1.1                | 1.0                 | 1.0                | 0.9                 | 0.9                | 0.9                |\n| Pensions &Other CFS Pensions                                          | 0.9 0.9        | 1.0 1.0         | 1.1 1.0          | 1.1 1.1         | 1.0 1.0             | 1.0 1.0            | 0.9 0.9             | 0.9 0.9            | 0.9 0.9             | 0.9 0.9            | 0.8 0.8             | 0.8 0.8            | 0.8 0.8            |\n| Other CFS                                                             | 0.0            | 0.0             | 0.0              | 0.0             | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 0.0                |\n| Contribution to Civil Service Pension Fund                            | 0.2            | 0.2             | 0.2              | 0.2             | 0.2                 | 0.2 7.8            | 0.2 7.4             | 0.2 7.5            | 0.2 7.1             | 0.2                | 0.2 7.2             | 0.2 7.3            | 0.2 7.3            |\n| Net Issues/Net Expenditure O/W: Wages &Salaries                       | 8.8 3.7        | 8.4 3.6         | 7.6 3.4          | 8.5 3.7         | 7.9 3.4             | 3.4                | 3.3                 | 3.3                | 3.1                 | 7.2                | 2.9                 | 3.0                | 3.0                |\n| Free Secondary education                                              | 0.4            | 0.3             | 0.3              | 0.3             | 0.3                 | 0.3                | 0.3                 | 0.3                | 0.3                 | 3.1 0.3            | 0.3                 | 0.3                | 0.3                |\n| Free Primary Education                                                | 0.1 0.2        | 0.2             | 0.0              | 0.0             | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 0.1 0.2             | 0.1                | 0.1                 | 0.1                | 0.1                 | 0.1 0.2            | 0.1 0.2            |\n| Junior Secondary School - Capitation IEBC                             | 0.0            | 0.0 0.0         | 0.2 0.0          | 0.2 0.0         | 0.2 0.1             | 0.2 0.1            | 0.1                 | 0.2 0.1            | 0.2 0.1             | 0.2 0.1            | 0.2 0.1             | 0.1                | 0.1                |\n| Defense and NIS                                                       | 1.3 3.0        | 1.3             | 1.3              | 1.4             | 1.2                 | 1.4                | 1.1                 | 1.3                | 1.0                 | 1.2                | 0.9                 | 0.9 2.6            | 0.9 2.6            |\n| Others                                                                | 1.8            | 2.7             | 2.3              | 2.7             | 2.6                 | 2.4                | 2.3 1.7             | 2.1 1.7            | 2.2 1.7             | 2.1                | 2.6 1.5             |                    |                    |\n| Ministerial Recurrent AIA Development and Net lending                 | 3.5            | 1.8 3.4         | 1.7 3.4          | 1.9 3.7         | 1.6 3.6             | 1.7 3.6            | 3.8                 | 3.8                | 4.1                 | 1.5 4.1            | 4.0                 | 1.5 4.0 2.7        | 1.5 4.0 2.7        |\n| Domestically financed (Gross) O/WDomestically Financed (Net)/NMS AIA  | 2.4 1.6        | 2.3 1.3         | 2.3 1.2          | 2.6 1.5         | 2.4 1.4             | 2.4 1.3            | 2.5 1.5             | 2.5 1.5            | 2.7 1.7             | 2.7 1.7            | 2.7 1.7             | 1.8                | 1.8                |\n| Ministerial Development                                               | 1.3 1.0        | 1.0             | 1.0              | 1.2             | 1.0                 | 1.1                | 1.0 1.2             | 1.0                | 1.0 1.3             | 1.0 1.3            | 1.0                 | 1.0                | 1.0                |\n| Foreign financed Net lending                                          | 0.1            | 1.0             | 1.0              | 1.1             | 1.2                 | 1.1                | 0.0                 | 1.2                |                     |                    | 1.2 0.0             | 1.2 0.0            | 1.2 0.0            |\n|                                                                       |                | 0.1             | 0.0              | 0.0             | 0.0                 | 0.0                |                     | 0.0                | 0.0                 | 0.0                |                     |                    |                    |\n| Equalization Fund County Tranfers                                     | 0.0 2.4        | 0.0 2.6         | 0.0 2.5          | 0.1 2.6         | 0.1 2.1             | 0.1 2.4            | 0.1 2.0             | 0.1 2.1            | 0.1 1.9             | 0.1                | 0.1 1.8             | 0.1                | 0.1                |\n| Equitable Share                                                       | 2.3            | 2.4             | 2.2              | 2.2             | 2.0                 |                    | 1.9                 | 1.9                | 1.8                 | 1.9 1.8            | 1.7                 | 1.8                | 1.8                |\n| Conditional Allocation Contingency Fund                               | 0.2 0.0        | 0.2 0.0         | 0.4              | 0.4             | 0.1                 | 2.0 0.4            | 0.1                 | 0.1 0.0            | 0.1 0.0             | 0.1                | 0.1                 | 1.7 0.1            | 1.7 0.1            |\n| Fiscal Balance (commitment basis excl.                                | -5.8           |                 | 0.0 -4.9         | 0.0             | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 0.0                 | -3.9               | -3.7                | 0.0                | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 0.0                |\n| grants)                                                               |                | -6.1            |                  | -6.2            | -5.1                | -5.6               | -4.0                |                    |                     | -3.6               | -3.1                | -3.4               | -3.4               |\n| Grants                                                                | 0.1            | 0.2             | 0.2              | 0.2             | 0.2                 | 0.3                | 0.3 -3.7            | 0.3 -3.6           | 0.3 -3.4            | 0.3                | 0.3                 | 0.3 -3.2           | 0.3 -3.2           |\n| Fiscal Balance (incl. grants)                                         | -5.6 0.3       | -5.9            | -4.7             | -6.0            | -4.9                | -5.3 0.0           | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 0.0                 | -3.3 0.0           | -2.9 0.0            | 0.0                | 0.0                |\n| Adjustment to Cash Basis Fiscal Balance (incl. grants) Cash Basis     | -5.3 -0.1      | 0.0 -5.9        | 0.0 -4.7         | 0.0 -6.0        | 0.0 -4.9            | -5.3               | -3.7 0.0            | -3.6 0.0           | -3.4 0.0            | -3.3               | -2.9                | -3.2               | -3.2               |\n| Statistical discrepancy                                               |                | 0.1             | 0.0              | 0.0             | 0.0                 | 0.0                |                     |                    |                     | 0.0                | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 0.0                |\n| TOTAL FINANCING                                                       | 5.2            | 6.0             | 4.7              | 6.0             | 4.9                 | 5.3                | 3.7                 | 3.6                | 3.4                 | 3.3                | 2.9                 | 3.2                | 3.2                |\n| Net Foreign                                                           |                |                 | 1.5 3.3          | 1.3             | 0.5 2.7             |                    |                     | 1.2 2.9            | 0.9 2.5             |                    | 0.3 2.4             |                    |                    |\n| Financing Disbuserments                                               | 1.4 4.9        | 1.0 3.1         |                  | 4.9             |                     | 1.1 2.7            | 1.0 2.9             |                    | 0.5                 | 0.6 2.5            | 0.7                 | 0.5 2.3            | 0.5 2.3            |\n| Commercial Financing of which: External Debt Operations - Refinancing | 1.8 0.0 1.0    | 1.5             | 1.1 0.0          | 3.0 0.8         | 0.7 0.0             | 0.7 0.0            | 1.0 0.0 1.1         | 1.0 0.0            | 0.0                 | 0.6 0.0            | 0.0                 | 0.5                | 0.5                |\n| Total Project loans (AIA+ Revenue)                                    | 0.4            | 1.1             | 1.1 0.4          | 1.2 0.5         | 1.1 0.5             |                    | 0.5                 | 1.1 0.5            | 1.2 0.5             | 1.2 0.6            | 1.0 0.5             | 0.0 1.1 0.5        | 0.0 1.1 0.5        |\n| o/w: Project loans (AIA) Project Loans Revenue                        | 0.6            | 0.9 0.4 0.5     | 0.6 0.0          | 0.6             | 0.6                 | 1.1 0.5 0.6        | 0.6 0.0             | 0.6 0.0            | 0.7 0.0             | 0.7                | 0.6 0.0             |                    |                    |\n| Use of IMF SDR Allocation                                             | 0.0 0.0        | 0.0             | 0.0              | 0.0             | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 0.0                 | 0.0                | 0.0                 |                    |                    |"},{"table_page":123,"section":"vi) Compliance with the Requirement to Maintain a Reasonable Degree of Predictability with respect to the Level of Tax Rates and Tax Bases","markdown":"| Code..   | Sector |Sectorote Programme..                                 | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Current   | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Capital   | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Iotal   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2026/27.Current   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2026/27.Capital   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2026/27.Iotal   | 2026 BPS Projections..Current   | FY 2027/28..Capital   | 2026 BPS Projections..Iotal   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2028/29.Current   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2028/29.Capital   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2028/29.Iotal   |\n|:---------|:--------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------|:--------------------------------|:----------------------|:------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------|\n| 010      | AGRICULIURE, RURAL € URBAN DEVELOPMENT                        | 34,409.7                             | 47,998.1                             | 82,407.8                           | 41,357.6                                  | 55,649.4                                  | 97,007.0                                | 44,108.5                        | 47,081.1              | 91,189.6                      | 47,342.6                                  | 54,305.0                                  | 101,647.6                               |\n|          |                                                               | 5,780.2                              | 4,982.4                              | 10,762.6                           | 6,109.9                                   | 4,840.0                                   |                                         | 6,357.4                         | 4,960.0               | 113114                        | 6,688.9                                   | 5,010.0                                   | 11,698.9                                |\n|          | 0101000 Land Policy and Planning                              |                                      | 3.960.1                              |                                    | 4,593.9                                   | 4,014.0                                   | 8,607.9                                 | 4,738.7                         | 3950.0                | 8,688.7                       | 4,991.4                                   | 3,879.0                                   | 8,870.4                                 |\n|          | 0121000 Land Information Management                           | 71.0                                 | 1,022.3                              | 1,093.3                            | 113.0                                     | 826.0                                     | 939.0                                   | 152.8                           | 1,010.0               | 1,162.8                       | 160.5                                     | 1,131.0                                   | 12915                                   |\n|          | 0122000 General Administration Planning and Support Services  | 1,340.7                              |                                      | 1,340.7                            | 1,403.0                                   |                                           | 1,403.0                                 | 1,466.0                         |                       | 1,466.0                       | 1537.0                                    |                                           | 1,537.0                                 |\n|          | 1162 State Department for Livestock Development               | 5.035.4                              | 5.076.1                              |                                    | 5.147.0                                   | 10.348.7                                  | 15,495.7                                | 5551.3                          | 9.212.0               |                               | 5.944.4                                   | 95240                                     | 15,468.4                                |\n|          | 0112000 Livestock Resources_Management and Development        |                                      | 5.076.1                              | 10.1115                            | 5,147.0                                   | 10,348.7                                  | 15,495.7                                | 5,551.3                         | 9,212.0               | 14,763.3                      |                                           | 9,524.0                                   | 15,468.4                                |\n|          | 1166 State Department for the Blue Economy and Fisheries      | 2,998.2                              | 5,231.7                              | 8,229.9                            | 3,169.0                                   | 4,222.6                                   | 7,391.6                                 | 3,345.3                         | 1,745.0               | 5,090.3                       | 3,537.4                                   | 3,976.0                                   |                                         |\n|          | [0111000 Fisheries Development and Management                 |                                      | 5.231.7                              | 7,973.1                            | 2,880.6                                   | 3,416.6                                   |                                         | 3,040.3                         | 1,344.0               | 4,384.3                       | 3,215.9                                   | 186.0                                     | 3,401.9                                 |\n|          | [0117000 General Administration Planning and Support Services | 199.7                                |                                      | 199.7                              | 224.4                                     |                                           | 224.4                                   | 236.8                           |                       | 236.8                         | 247.2                                     |                                           | 247.2                                   |\n|          | 0118000 Development and Coordination of the Blue Economy      | 57.1                                 |                                      | 57.1                               | 64.0                                      | 806.0                                     | 870.0                                   | 68.3                            | 401.0                 | 469.3                         | 74.3                                      | 3,790.0                                   | 3,864.3                                 |\n|          | 1169 State_ Department for Agriculture                        |                                      |                                      | 49.9445                            |                                           | 35,397.6                                  | 59.994.9                                | 26,375.2                        | 30,589.1              | 56,.964.3                     | 28,543.0                                  | 35,061.0                                  | 63,604.0                                |\n|          | 0107000 General Administration Planning and Support Services  | 8.643.9                              | 11,035.0                             | 19,678.9                           | 14.923.4                                  | 4,087.0                                   | 19,010.4                                | 15,979.0                        | 3,246.5               | 19,225.5                      | 17,138.5                                  | 5,132.6                                   | 22,271.1                                |\n|          | 0108000 Crop Development and Management                       | 4,087.2                              | 20,316.8                             | 24,404.0                           | 3.780.3                                   | 30,860.6                                  | 34,640.9                                | 3,817.6                         | 26.992.6              | 30,810.2                      | 3.903.3                                   | 29,578.4                                  | 33,481.7                                |\n|          | 0109000 Agribusiness and Information Management               | 133.2                                | 800.0                                | 933.2                              | 143.6                                     |                                           | 143.6                                   | 190.6                           |                       | 190.6                         | 178.5                                     |                                           | 178.5                                   |\n|          | 0120000 Agricultural Research & Development                   | 4.928.5                              |                                      | 4928.5                             | 5,750.0                                   | 450.0                                     | 6,200.0                                 | 6,388.1                         | 350.0                 | 6,738.1                       | 7322.7                                    | 350.0                                     | 7,672.7                                 |\n|          | 2021 National Land Commission                                 | 2,803.2                              | 556.1                                | 3,359.3                            | 2,334.4                                   | 840.5                                     | 3,174.9                                 | 2,479.3                         | 575.0                 | 3,054.3                       | 2,628.9                                   | 734.0                                     | 3,362.9                                 |\n|          | [0116000 Land _Administration and Management                  | 2,803.2                              | 556.1                                | 3,359.3                            | 2,334.4                                   | 840.5                                     | 3,174.9                                 | 2,479.3                         | 575.0                 | 3,054.3                       | 2,628.9                                   | 734.0                                     | 3,362.9                                 |\n| 020      | EMERGY, INFRASIRUCIURE AND ICI                                | 154,186.4                            | 380,441.4                            | 534,627.8                          | 151,620.4                                 | 442,977.0                                 | 594,597.4                               | 155,022.0                       | 739,609.0             | 894,631.0                     | 159,778.0                                 | 735,150.0                                 | 894,928.0                               |\n|          | 1091 State_ Department for Roads                              |                                      | 150,2532                             | 221,794.5                          | 73,825.0                                  | 158,287.0                                 | 232,1120                                | 73,969.0                        | 181,785.0             | 255,754.0                     | 74572.0                                   |                                           | 278,538.0                               |\n|          | 0202000 Road Iransport                                        | 71,541.3                             | 150.253.2                            | 221,794.5                          | 73,825.0                                  | 158.287.0                                 | 232112.0                                |                                 | 181.785.0             | 255,754.0                     | 74,572.0                                  | 203.966.0                                 | 278,538.0                               |\n|          | 1092 State_ Department for Iransport                          |                                      | 40,334.2                             | 47,456.0                           |                                           | 57.950.0                                  | 65,061.0                                |                                 | 61,408.0              | 69,030.0                      | 8,255.0                                   | 63,524.0                                  | 71,779.0                                |\n|          | 0201000 General Administration Planning and Support Services  | 1,628.1                              | 2,404.3                              | 4,032.4                            | 1,714.0                                   | 2,711.0                                   | 4,425.0                                 | 1,881.0                         | 2,936.0               | 4,817.0                       | 2,217.0                                   | 3,023.0                                   | 5,240.0                                 |\n|          | 0203000 Rai Iransport                                         | 607.1                                | 36,509.4                             | 37,116.5                           | 491.0                                     | 48,408.0                                  | 48,899.0                                | 730.0                           | 45,804.0              | 46,534.0                      | 824.0                                     | 45,494.0                                  | 46,318.0                                |\n|          | 0204000 Marine Iransport                                      | 15.9                                 | 450.0                                | 465.9                              | 27.0                                      | 5,900.0                                   | 5.927.0                                 | 29.0                            | 12,668.0              | 12,697.0                      | 30.0                                      | 15,007.0                                  | 15.037.0                                |\n|          | 0205000 Air Iranspont                                         |                                      |                                      |                                    |                                           |                                           |                                         |                                 |                       |                               |                                           |                                           |                                         |\n|          | 0216000 Road Safety                                           | 4,870.8                              | 970.5                                | 5,841.2                            | 4,879.0                                   | 931.0                                     | 5,810.0                                 | 4,982.0                         |                       | 4,982.0                       | 5,184.0                                   |                                           | 5,184.0                                 |\n|          |                                                               | 3,458.8                              | 2,224.6                              | 5,683.4                            | 5,032.0                                   | 1,351.0                                   | 6,383.0                                 | 5,603.0                         |                       | 7,097.0                       | 6,109.0                                   | 2,564.0                                   | 8,673.0                                 |\n|          | 0220000 Shipping and Maritime Affairs                         | 3,458.8                              | 2,224.6                              | 5.683.4                            | 5,032.0                                   | 1.351.0                                   | 6,383.0                                 | 5.603.0                         |                       | 7,097.0                       | 6,109.0                                   | 2564.0                                    | 8.673.0                                 |"},{"table_page":124,"section":"vi) Compliance with the Requirement to Maintain a Reasonable Degree of Predictability with respect to the Level of Tax Rates and Tax Bases","markdown":"| Sector |Sectorote Programme..                                    | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Current   | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Capital   | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Iotal   | FY 2026/27.Current Capital   | FY 2026/27.Iotal   | FY 2026/27.Current   | FY 2027/28.   | FY 2027/28.Capital   | FY 2027/28.Iotal   | FY 2028/29.Current   | FY 2028/29.Capital   | FY 2028/29.Iotal   |\n|:-----------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------|:-----------------------------|:-------------------|:---------------------|:--------------|:---------------------|:-------------------|:---------------------|:---------------------|:-------------------|\n| EMERGY, INFRASIRUCIURE AND ICI                                   | 154,186.4 380,441.4                  | 534,627.8                            | 151,620.4                          | 442,977.0                    |                    | 155,022.0            |               | 739,609.0            | 894,631.0          | 159,778.0            | 735.150.0            | 894,928.0          |\n| 1094 State Department for & Urban Development Housing            | 7,099.4 116,729.4                    |                                      | 123,828.8                          | 5,689.0                      | 133,647.0          | 139,336.0            | 5,937.0       | 376,639.0            | 382,575.0          | 6,275.0              | 331,908.0            | 338,183.0          |\n| 0102000 Housing Development and Human Settlement                 | 4,734.1                              | 103,061.9                            | 107,796.0                          | 4,638.0                      | 113,752.0          | 118.390.0            | 4,829.0       | 361,757.0            | 366.586.0          |                      | 331,024.0            | 336,073.0          |\n| 0105000 Urban and Metropolitan Development                       | 1,773.8                              | 13,667.5                             | 15,441.2                           | 516.0                        | 19,895.0           | 20,411.0             | 545.0         | 14,882.0             | 15,426.0           | 622.0                | 884.0                | 1506.0             |\n| [0106000 General Administration Planning and Support Services    | 591.6                                |                                      | 591.6                              | 535.0                        |                    | 535.0                | 563.0         |                      | 563.0              | 604.0                |                      | 604.0              |\n| 1095 State Department for Public Works                           | 3.691.7                              | 753.0                                | 4,444.7                            | 3,398.0                      | 1,599.0            |                      | 3,708.0       | 1619.0               | 5328.0             | 4,098.0              |                      | 5,948.0            |\n| 0103000 Government Buidings_                                     | 645.3                                | 454.0                                | 1,099.3                            | 753.0                        | 622.0              | 1375.0               | 794.0         | 730.0                | 1525.0             | 854.0                | 856.0                | 1,710.0            |\n| [Programme: Ocean Rivers; and Lakes Ecosystem Infrastructure     |                                      |                                      |                                    | 98.0                         | 887.0              | 985.0                | 125.0         | 719.0                | 844.0              | 144.0                | 704.0                | 848.0              |\n| 0104000 Coastline Infrastructure and Pedestrian Access           | 102.8                                | 249.0                                | 351.8                              |                              |                    |                      |               |                      |                    |                      |                      |                    |\n| 0106000 General Administration and Support Services Planning     | 355.1                                |                                      | 355.1                              | 352.0                        |                    | 352.0                | 362.0         |                      | 362.0              | 449.0                |                      | 449.0              |\n| 0218000 Regulation and Development of the Construction [Industry | 2,588.5                              | 50.0                                 | 2,638.5                            | 2,195.0                      | 90.0               | 2,285.0              | 2,427.0       | 170.0                | 2,597.0            | 2,651.0              | 290.0                | 2,941.0            |\n| 1097 State Department for Aviation and Aerospace Development     | 14,156.4                             | 358.8                                | 14,515.2                           | 13,308.0                     | 479.0              | 13,787.0             | 13,535.0      | 512.0                | 14,047.0           | 13,928.0             | 587.0                | 14,515.0           |\n| 0205000 Air Iransport                                            | 14,156.4                             | 358.8                                | 14,515.2                           | 13,308.0                     | 479.0              | 13,787.0             | 13,535.0      | 512.0                | 14,047.0           | 13.928.0             | 587.0                | 14,515.0           |\n| 1122 State Department for Information Communication              | 3,553.6                              | 12,635.2                             | 16,188.8                           | 3,554.0                      | 14,415.0           | 17,969.0             | 4,224.0       | 20,103.0             | 24,326.0           | 4,788.0              | 23,423.0             | 28,211.0           |\n| 0207000 General Administration Planning and Support Services     | 403.4                                |                                      | 403.4                              | 419.0                        |                    | 419.0                | 449.0         |                      | 449.0              | 519.0                |                      | 519.0              |\n| [0210000 ICT Infrastructure Development                          | 1,171.3                              | 11,920.0                             | 13,091.3                           | 241.0                        | 13,650.0           | 13,891.0             | 238.0         | 19,349.0             | 19,586.0           | 272.0                | 22,546.0             | 22,818.0           |\n| 0217000 E-Government Services                                    | 1,978.8                              | 715.2                                | 2,694.0                            | 1,895.0                      | 383.0              | 2,278.0              | 2,319.0       | 346.0                | 2,665.0            | 2,589.0              | 409.0                | 2,998.0            |\n| [Programme 4 ICI Security & Data Protection Services             |                                      |                                      |                                    | 999.0                        | 382.0              | 1,381.0              | 1,218.0       | 408.0                | 1,626.0            | 1,408.0              | 468.0                | 1,876.0            |\n| 1123 State Department for Broadcasting & Ielecommunications      | 6,197.2                              | 356.0                                | 6,553.2                            | 6,010.0                      | 430.0              | 6,440.0              | 6,497.0       | 460.0                | 6,957.0            | 7,088.0              | 527.0                | 7,615.0            |\n| 0207000 General Administration and Support Services Planning     | 238.7                                |                                      | 238.7                              | 252.0                        |                    | 252.0                | 260.0         |                      | 260.0              | 269.0                |                      | 269.0              |\n| 0208000 Information And Communication Services                   | 5,6821                               | 322.4                                | 6,004.5                            | 5,470.0                      | 399.0              | 5,869.0              | 5921.0        | 340.0                |                    | 6,424.0              | 345.0                | 6,769.0            |\n| 0209000 Media Skalls Development Mass                            | 276.4                                | 33.7                                 | 310.1                              | 288.0                        | 31.0               | 319.0                | 316.0         | 120.0                | 436.0              | 395.0                | 182.0                | 577.0              |\n|                                                                  | 11,987.9                             | 51,485.9                             | 63,473.8                           |                              | 64.984.0           | 78,286.4             | 13,471.0      | 85,189.0             | 98,661.0           | 14,057.0             | 95,775.0             | 109.832.0          |\n| J0211000 General Administration Planning Support Services and    | 369.7                                | 280.0                                | 649.7                              | 385.0                        | 1,133.0            | 1,518.0              | 428.0         | 516.0                | 944.0              | 565.0                | 597.0                | 1,162.0            |\n| 0212000 Power Generation                                         | 2,3315                               | 10,507.9                             | 12,845.4                           | 2,761.4                      | 13,712.0           | 16473.4              | 2,791.0       | 20.930.0             |                    | 2,922.0              | 46,690.0             | 49,612.0           |\n| 0213000 Power Iransmission and Distribution                      | 9.220.4                              | 38,659.4                             | 47,879.8                           | 10.084.0                     | 47,527.0           |                      |               | 61,588.0             | 71,765.0           | 10,482.0             | 47,001.0             | 57,483.0           |\n| 0214000 Alternative Iechnologies                                 | 60.3                                 | 2,038.7                              | 2,098.9                            | 72.0                         | 2,612.0            | 2,684.0              | 75.0          | 2,155.0              | 2,231.0            | 88.0                 | 1,487.0              | 1,575.0            |\n| 1193 State_ Department for Petroleum                             | 25.378.4                             |                                      | 30,689.4                           | 20,391.0                     | 9.835.0            | 30.226.0             | 20,456.0      | 10,400.0             |                    | 20,608.0             | 11,026.0             | 31,634.0           |\n| [0215000 Exploration and Distribution of Ol and Gas              | 25,378.4                             | 5311.0                               | 30,689.4                           | 20,391.0                     | 9,835.0            | 30,226.0             | 20,456.0      | 10,400.0             | 30,856.0           | 20,608.0             | 11,026.0             | 31,634.0           |"},{"table_page":125,"section":"vi) Compliance with the Requirement to Maintain a Reasonable Degree of Predictability with respect to the Level of Tax Rates and Tax Bases","markdown":"| Sector |SectorNote Programme..                                            | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Current   | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Capital   | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Iotal   | FY 2026/27.Current   | FY 2026/27.Capital   | FY 2026/27.Iotal   | FY 2027/28.Current   | FY 2027/28.Capital   | FY 2027/28.Iotal   | FY 2028/29.Current   | FY 2028/29.Capital   | FY 2028/29.Iotal   |\n|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------|:---------------------|:---------------------|:-------------------|:---------------------|:---------------------|:-------------------|:---------------------|:---------------------|:-------------------|\n|                                                                           | 36,558.3                             | 21,6015                              | 58,159.9                           | 31562.7              | 24,630.2             | 62,192.9           | 40,181.1             | 30,310.9             | 70,492.0           | 41,740.6             | 30,979.1             | 72,719.7           |\n| 1036 State Department for the ASALs and Regional Development              | 7,073.6                              | 3,805.2                              | 10,878.8                           |                      | 3,726.2              | 11,268.1           | 7,622.6              | 4,192.7              | 11.815.3           | 7,283.2              | 4,279.9              | 11,563.1           |\n| 0733000 Accelerated ASAL Development                                      | 4,802.0                              | 2,055.7                              | 6,857.8                            | 5,287.1              | 2,448.3              | 7,735.4            | 5,402.9              | 2,547.8              | 7,950.7            | 5,140.8              | 2,597.8              | 7,738.6            |\n| 0743000 General Administration Planning and Support Services              | 279.4                                |                                      | 279.4                              | 294.9                | 294.9                | 294.9              | 293.0                | 293.0                | 293.0              | 309.7                | 309.7                | 309.7              |\n| [1013000 Integrated Regional Development                                  | 1,992.2                              | 1,749.5                              | 3,741.7                            | 1,959.9              |                      | 3,237.8            | 1926.7               | 1,645.0              | 3,571.6            | 1,832.8              | 1,682.2              | 3,514.9            |\n| 1173 State Department for Cooperatives                                    | 5.877.6                              | 14714                                | 7349.0                             | 5.938.1              | 1530.8               |                    | 6,394.8              | 2,136.8              | 8.531.6            |                      |                      | 8,724.6            |\n| 0304000 Cooperauive Development and Management                            | 5,877.6                              | 1,471.4                              |                                    | 5938.1               | 1,530.8              | 7,468.8            | 6,394.8              | 2,136.8              | 8,531.6            | 6474.5               | 2,250.0              | 8,724.6            |\n| 1174 State Department for Irade                                           | 39841                                | 369.8                                | 4353.9                             | 3,7712               | 433.8                | 42110              | 4182,3               | 605.5                | 4,787.8            | 4,5085               | 637.6                | 5,146.0            |\n| 0309000 Domestic Trade and Enterprise Development                         | 2023.9                               | 299.8                                | 2,323.7                            | 1,960.1              | 333.8                | 2,293.9            | 2,178.9              | 2953                 | 2474.2             |                      | 389.8                |                    |\n| 0310000 Fair Trade Practices And Compliance of Standards                  | 192.3                                | 70.0                                 | 262.3                              | 239.3                | 100.0                | 339.3              | 265.3                | 310.2                | 575.4              | 281.3                | 247.8                | 529.1              |\n| 0311000 International Trade Development and Promotion_                    | 1,405.4                              |                                      | 1,405.4                            | 1,286.7              |                      | 1,286.7            | 1,422.8              |                      | 1,422.8            |                      |                      | 1,547.6            |\n| 0312000 General Administration Planning and Support Services              | 362.4                                |                                      | 3624                               | 291.1                |                      | 291.1              | 315.4                |                      | 315.4              | 299.0                | 299.0                | 299.0              |\n| 1175 State Department for Industry                                        | 3,579.8                              |                                      | 9,402.0                            | 4,313.9              | 4.877.6              | 9,1915             | 4,695.9              | 7.855.5              | 12,5514            | 5.138.6              | 8.271.8              | 13.410.4           |\n| 0301000 General Administration Planning and Support Services              | 752.6                                |                                      | 752.6                              | 609.9                |                      | 609.9              | 601.4                |                      | 601.4              | 615.8                | 615.8                | 615.8              |\n| 0320000 Industrial Promotion and Development                              | 1,770.7                              | 4,892.3                              | 6,663.0                            | 2,176.1              | 4,227.6              | 6,403.6            | 2,352.6              | 6,319.6              | 8,672.2            | 2,697.4              |                      | 8,736.0            |\n| 0321000 Standards and Qualitry Infrastuctre & Research                    | 1,056.5                              | 930.0                                | 1,986.5                            | 1,528.0              | 650.0                | 2,178.0            | 1,741.9              | 1,535.9              | 3,277.9            | 1,825.3              | 2,2333               | 4,058.6            |\n| 1176 State Department for Micro Small and Medium [Entexprises Development | 2,031.7                              | 3,061.8                              | 5,0935                             | 2,040.2              | 4,843.9              | 6,884.0            | 2,268.7              | 5,119.4              | 7,388.1            | 2,440.2              | 5,170.9              | 7,611.1            |\n| 0316000 Promotion and Development of MSMEs                                | 880.6                                | 2,711.8                              | 3,592.4                            | 881.2                | 3,893.9              | 4,775.0            | 954.4                | 4,019.4              | 4973.8             | 1,007.3              | 4,038.9              |                    |\n| [0317000 Product and Market Development for MSMEs                         | 513.4                                |                                      | 513.4                              | 512.7                | 550.0                | 1,062.7            | 516.6                | 550.0                | 1,066.6            | 536.2                | 550.0                | 1,086.2            |\n| 0318000 Digitization and Financial Inclusion for MSMEs                    | 335.6                                | 350.0                                | 685.6                              | 340.0                | 400.0                | 740.0              | 493.6                | 550.0                | 1,043.6            | 580.1                | 582.1                | 1162.2             |\n| 0319000 General Administration Planning and Support Services              | 302.1                                |                                      | 302.1                              | 306.3                |                      | 306.3              | 304.1                |                      | 304.1              | 316.5                |                      | 316.5              |\n| 1177 State Department for Investments Promotion                           | 1,451.4                              | 2,061.0                              | 3,5125                             | 1,562.7              | 3,200.0              | 4,762.7            | 1,625.8              | 4,110.6              | 5,736.4            |                      | 4,280.7              | 5,992.1            |\n| 0322000 Investment Development and Promotion                              | 1,451.4                              | 2,061.0                              | 3,5125                             | 1562.7               | 3,200.0              | 4,762.7            | 1,625.8              | 4,110.6              | 5.736.4            | 1,711.4              | 4,280.7              | 5992.1             |\n| 1202 State Department for Iourism                                         | 11525.4                              | 5.010.0                              | 16,535.4                           | 115414               | 6,.018.0             | 17565.4            | 12,543.6             | 6.2905               | 18.834.0           | 13.310.8             |                      | 19.399.0           |\n| 0313000 Tourism Promotion Marketing and                                   | 809.7                                | 584.0                                | 1,393.7                            | 1249.9               | 200.0                | 1,449.9            | 1,514.9              | 200.0                | 1,714.9            | 1.755.9              | 220.0                | 1975.9             |\n| 0314000 Tourism Product Development and Diversification                   | 10472.6                              | 4,386.0                              | 14,858.6                           | 9,898.1              | 5,738.0              | 15,636.1           |                      | 6,070.5              | 16,707.8           | 11,170.1             | 5,858.2              | 17,028.3           |\n|                                                                           | 243.1                                | 40.0                                 | 283.1                              | 399.4                | 80.0                 | 479.4              | 391.4                | 20.0                 | 411.4              | 384.8                | 10.0                 | 394.8              |\n| 1221 State Department for East African Community                          | 1,034.7                              |                                      | 1,034.7                            | 841.4                |                      | 841.4              | 847.4                |                      | 847.4              | 8735                 |                      | 873.5              |\n| [0305000 East African Affairs and Regional Integration                    | 1,034.7                              |                                      | 1,034.7                            | 841.4                |                      | 841.4              | 847.4                |                      | 847.4              | 873.5                |                      | 873.5              |"},{"table_page":126,"section":"vi) Compliance with the Requirement to Maintain a Reasonable Degree of Predictability with respect to the Level of Tax Rates and Tax Bases","markdown":"| Code..   |                                                                                                                | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Current   | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Capital   | Sector |Sectorote Programme.Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Iotal   | Sector |Sectorote Programme.FY 2026/27.Current   | Sector |Sectorote Programme.FY 2026/27.Capital   | Sector |Sectorote Programme.FY 2026/27.Iotal   | Sector |Sectorote Programme.2026 BPS Projections FY 2027/28.Current   | Sector |Sectorote Programme.2026 BPS Projections FY 2027/28.Capital   | Sector |Sectorote Programme.2026 BPS Projections FY 2027/28.Iotal   | Sector |Sectorote Programme.FY 2028/29.Current   | Sector |Sectorote Programme.FY 2028/29.Capital   | Sector |Sectorote Programme.FY 2028/29.Iotal   |\n|:---------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------|\n| 040      | HEALIH                                                                                                         | 110,608.3                            | 21,4913                              | 138,105.5                                                      | 136,024.1                                        |                                                  |                                                | 156,938.5                                                             | 40,439.1                                                              | 191371.6                                                            | 164,143.2                                        | 38,980.3                                         |                                                |\n|          | 1082 State Department for Medical Services                                                                     | 84,017.3                             | 21,936.1                             | 105,953.4                                                      | 107,904.6                                        | 26,399.0                                         | 134,303.6                                      | 124,110.6                                                             | 27,428.5                                                              | 151,539.1                                                           | 129,154.4                                        | 24,681.3                                         | 153,835.7                                      |\n|          | 0402000 National Referral & Specialized Services                                                               | 48,669.2                             | 6,449.0                              | 55,118.2                                                       | 69,099.8                                         | 6.976.0                                          | 76,075.8                                       | 70,090.0                                                              | 7,361.0                                                               | 77,450.9                                                            | 72,738.5                                         | 9,387.3                                          | 82,125.8                                       |\n|          | Adolescent Health RMNCAH                                                                                       | 1,634.0                              | 15,267.1                             | 16,901.0                                                       | 1,913.6                                          | 18,784.0                                         | 20,697.6                                       | 1,911.0                                                               | 18,117.5                                                              | 20,028.5                                                            | 2,002.6                                          | 14,394.0                                         | 16,396.6                                       |\n|          |                                                                                                                | 2,942.6                              | 220.0                                | 3,162.6                                                        |                                                  | 539.0                                            | 4,128.5                                        | 3,664.3                                                               | 1,850.0                                                               | 5514.3                                                              | 3,846.1                                          | 800.0                                            | 4,646.1                                        |\n|          | J0412000 General Administration                                                                                |                                      |                                      | 30,771.5                                                       | 33,301.7                                         | 100.0                                            | 33,401.7                                       | 48,445.4                                                              | 100.0                                                                 | 48,545.4                                                            |                                                  | 100.0                                            | 50,667.3                                       |\n|          | 1083 State Department for Public Health and Professional Standard                                              | 26,591.0                             | 5,561.2                              | 32,152.2                                                       | 28,1195                                          | 4,983.9                                          | 33,103.4                                       | 32,827.9                                                              | 13,010.6                                                              | 45,838.5                                                            | 34,988.8                                         | 14,299.0                                         | 49,287.8                                       |\n|          | 0406000 Preventive 2nd Promotive Health Services                                                               | 5,803.0                              | 4,346.2                              | 10,149.1                                                       | 5,833.4                                          | 3,544.4                                          | 9,377.8                                        | 5,958.3                                                               | 12,060.6                                                              | 18,018.9                                                            | 6,090.5                                          | 12,501.0                                         | 18,591.5                                       |\n|          | 0407000 Health Resources Development and Innovation                                                            | 13,985.5                             | 1,165.0                              | 15,150.5                                                       | 16,567.7                                         | 1,103.1                                          | 17,670.8                                       | 20,790.3                                                              | 700.0                                                                 | 21,490.3                                                            | 22,488.0                                         | 1,398.0                                          | 23,886.0                                       |\n|          | 0408000 Health Policy Standards and Regulations                                                                | 4,321.5                              | 50.0                                 |                                                                | 4960.7                                           | 236.4                                            | 5,197.1                                        | 5,267.8                                                               | 150.0                                                                 | 5,417.8                                                             | 5,553.4                                          | 300.0                                            | 5,853.4                                        |\n| 050      |                                                                                                                | 2,475.0                              |                                      | 2,475.0                                                        | 757.8                                            | 100.0                                            | 857.8                                          | 811.5                                                                 | 100.0                                                                 | 9115                                                                | 857.0                                            | 100.0                                            | 957.0                                          |\n| 050      | EDUCAIION 1064 State Department for Technical, Vocational Education and Iraining                               | 673,286.5 35,408.4                   | 29,779.7 7,836.3                     | 703,066.2 43,244.8                                             | 39,946.4                                         | 30.113.0 7,077.0                                 | 7673142 47,023.4                               | 781,2743                                                              | 35,066.0 8,602.0                                                      | 816,340.3 49,271.6                                                  | 825,548.7 41,386.5                               | 43,842.0 10,915.0                                | 869,390.7 52,3015                              |\n|          | 0505000 Iechnical Vocational Education and Iraining                                                            | 34,528.8                             | 7,836.3                              | 42,365.1                                                       | 39,050.2                                         | 7,077.0                                          | 46,127.2                                       | 40,669.6 39,752.4                                                     | 8,602.0                                                               | 48,354.4                                                            | 40,445.3                                         | 10.915.0                                         | 51,360.3                                       |\n|          | 0507000 Youth Iraining and Development                                                                         | 54.1                                 |                                      | 54.1                                                           | 60.7                                             |                                                  | 60.7                                           | 66.7                                                                  |                                                                       | 66.7                                                                | 72.7                                             |                                                  | 72.7                                           |\n|          | [0508000 General Administration Planning and Support Services_                                                 | 825.6                                |                                      | 825.6                                                          | 835.5                                            |                                                  | 835.5                                          | 850.5                                                                 |                                                                       | 850.5                                                               | 868.5                                            |                                                  | 868.5                                          |\n|          | 1065 State Department for Higher Education € Research                                                          | 140,953.0                            | 2,782.0                              | 143,735.0                                                      | 155,207.1                                        | 4,884.0                                          | 160,091.1                                      | 175,503.9                                                             | 6,620.0                                                               | 182,123.9                                                           | 191,636.5                                        | 8,307.0                                          | 199,943.5                                      |\n|          | 0504000 University Education                                                                                   | 140,652.4                            | 2,782.0                              | 143,434.4                                                      | 154,870.9                                        | 4,884.0                                          | 159,754.9                                      | 175,125.6                                                             | 6,620.0                                                               | 181,745.6                                                           | 191,214.9                                        | 8,307.0                                          | 199,521.9                                      |\n|          | 0506000 Research Science Technology and Innovation 0508000 General Administration Plannng and Support Services | 300.6                                |                                      | 300.6                                                          | 336.3                                            |                                                  | 336.3                                          | 378.3                                                                 |                                                                       | 378.3                                                               | 421.5                                            |                                                  | 4215                                           |\n|          |                                                                                                                | 109,421.8                            | 18,490.4                             | 127912.2                                                       | 118,680.5                                        | 16,098.0                                         | 134,778.5                                      | 123,718.3                                                             | 17.363.0                                                              | 141,081.3                                                           | 133.921.0                                        | 21,448.0                                         | 155,369.0                                      |\n|          | 0501000 Primary_Education                                                                                      | 12,291.6                             | 14,370.8                             | 26,662.4                                                       | 12,371.4                                         | 9,354.0                                          | 21,725.4                                       | 13,358.4                                                              | 11,244.0                                                              | 24,602.4                                                            | 14,373.4                                         | 13,698.0                                         | 28,071.4                                       |\n|          | 0502000 Secondary Education*                                                                                   | 81,946.8                             | 4,094.6                              | 86,041.5                                                       | 86,681.8                                         | 6,572.0                                          | 93,253.8                                       | 88,682.8                                                              | 6.079.0                                                               | 94,761.8                                                            | 96,683.8                                         | 7,663.0                                          | 104,346.8                                      |\n|          | 0503000 Quality Assurance Standards and                                                                        | 9,949.7                              | 25.0                                 | 9,974.7                                                        | 142795                                           | 172.0                                            | 14,4515                                        | 15,392.2                                                              | 40.0                                                                  | 15432.2                                                             | 15,474.2                                         | 87.0                                             | 15,561.2                                       |\n|          | 0508000 General Administration Plannng and Support Services                                                    | 5,233.7                              |                                      | 5,233.7                                                        | 5,347.8                                          |                                                  | 5347.8                                         | 6,284.9                                                               |                                                                       | 6,284.9                                                             | 7,389.6                                          |                                                  | 7,389.6                                        |\n|          | 1067 State Department for Science, Innovation and                                                              |                                      |                                      | 992.9                                                          | 1,153.0                                          | 1,312.0                                          | 2,465.0                                        | 1,245.2                                                               | 1,681.0                                                               | 2,926.2                                                             |                                                  | 2,143.0                                          | 3,550.8                                        |\n|          | Research                                                                                                       |                                      |                                      |                                                                |                                                  |                                                  |                                                |                                                                       |                                                                       |                                                                     | 1.407.8                                          |                                                  |                                                |\n|          |                                                                                                                | 992.9                                |                                      | 992.9                                                          | 1,153.0                                          | 1,312.0                                          | 2,465.0                                        | 1,245.2                                                               | 1,681.0                                                               | 2926.2                                                              | 1,407.8                                          | 2,143.0                                          | 3,550.8                                        |\n|          | 2091 Ieachers Service Commission                                                                               | 386,510.4                            | 671.0                                | 387.1814                                                       | 422,2143                                         | 742.0                                            | 422,956.3                                      |                                                                       | 800.0                                                                 | 440,937.3                                                           | 457,1910                                         | 1029.0                                           | 458,226.0                                      |\n|          | 0509000 Teacher Resource Management                                                                            | 376,889.5                            | 629.0                                | 377,518.5                                                      | 411,695.2                                        | 681.0                                            | 412,376.2                                      | 429.240.6                                                             | 704.0                                                                 | 429,944.6                                                           | 445.937.7                                        | 857.0                                            | 446,794.7                                      |\n|          | 0511000 General Administration Planning and Support Services                                                   | 1,064.2                              |                                      | 1,064.2                                                        | 1,583.8                                          |                                                  | 1,583.8                                        | 1,583.8                                                               |                                                                       | 1,583.8                                                             | 1,583.8                                          |                                                  | 1,583.8                                        |"},{"table_page":127,"section":"vi) Compliance with the Requirement to Maintain a Reasonable Degree of Predictability with respect to the Level of Tax Rates and Tax Bases","markdown":"| Sector |Sector ote Programme.Code.                                        | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Current   | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Capital Iotal   | FY 2026/27.Current   | FY 2026/27.Capital   | FY 2026/27.Iotal   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2027/28.Current   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2027/28.   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2027/28.Capital   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2028/29.Iotal Current   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2028/29.   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2028/29.Capital   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2028/29.Iotal   |\n|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------|:---------------------|:---------------------|:-------------------|:------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------|\n| GOIERYAYCE JUSIICE LAW AND ORDER                                          | 264,118.5                            | 18,923.9                                   |                      | 304,059.5 25,929.7   | 329,989.2          | 310.983.7                                 |                                    | 28,268.5                                  |                                                 | 312,676.5                          | 32,199.8                                  | 344,876.3                               |\n| 1023 State_Department for Correctional Services                           |                                      | 309.0                                      |                      | 42,437.4             | 1,022.4            | 43,459.8                                  | 45.2115                            | 2,813.0                                   | 48,024.5                                        | 48.152.9                           | 4,288.7                                   | 52,441.6                                |\n| 0623000 General Administration Planning and Support Services              | 641.1                                | 16.0                                       | 657.1                | 651.1                | 100.0              | 751.1                                     | 840.6                              |                                           | 840.6                                           | 1,040.9                            | 625.0                                     | 1,665.9                                 |\n| 0627000 Prison Services                                                   | 34,752.9                             | 223.1                                      | 34.976.0             | 39410.0              | 782.6              | 40,192.6                                  | 41,577.6                           | 2,418.8                                   | 43,996.4                                        | 43,854.6                           | 3,180.5                                   | 47,035.0                                |\n| 0628000 Probation & After Care Services                                   | 2,450.3                              | 69.9                                       | 2,520.2              | 2,376.4              | 139.8              | 2,516.1                                   | 2,793.4                            | 394.2                                     | 3,187.6                                         | 3,257.4                            | 483.2                                     | 3,740.6                                 |\n| 1024 State Department for Immigration and Citizen Services                |                                      | 10,640.3                                   | 22,344.7             | 12,815.7             | 11,136.2           | 23,951.9                                  | 13,325.2                           |                                           | 24,548.4                                        | 13,686.2                           | 1l,541.2                                  | 25,227.5                                |\n|                                                                           | 3,478.2                              | 7,441.1                                    | 12,919.3             |                      | 7,441.1            | 13,245.3                                  | 6.078.3                            | 7,441.1                                   | 13,519.3                                        | 6,243.1                            | 7,513.5                                   | 13,756.6                                |\n| 0626000 Population Management Services                                    |                                      | 2999.2                                     | 8.085.6              | 5.639.6              | 3,395.1            | 9,034.7                                   | 5,826.6                            |                                           |                                                 | 5.985.9                            | 3,692.7                                   | 9,678.6                                 |\n| 0631000 General Administration and Planning                               | 1,139.8                              | 200.0                                      | 1,339.8              | 1,371.9              | 300.0              | 1,671.9                                   | 1,420.4                            | 315.0                                     | 1,735.4                                         | 1,457.3                            | 335.0                                     | 1,792.3                                 |\n| 1025 Yational Police Service                                              |                                      | 1,712.8                                    | 127,091.4            | 136,378.0            | 2,813.9            | 139,191.9                                 | 140,792.3                          | 3,188.6                                   | 143,980.8                                       | 151.1615                           | 3,646.6                                   | 154,808.1                               |\n| 0601000 Policing Services                                                 | 125,378.6                            | 1,712.8                                    | 127,091.4            | 136,378.0            | 2,813.9            | 139,191.9                                 | 140.,792.3                         | 3,188.6                                   | 143.980.8                                       | 151,161.5                          | 3,646.6                                   | 154,808 .                               |\n| 1026 State Department for Internal Security and National Administration   | 31,864.5                             | 3,965.8                                    | 35,830.3             | 35,786.3             | 7,351.6            | 43,137.9                                  | 37,153.3                           | 8,142.3                                   | 45,295.6                                        | 38,130.8                           | 8,572.7                                   | 46,703.6                                |\n| 0629000 General Administration and Support Services_                      | 10.824.8                             | 3,553.8                                    | 14,378.6             | 13,533.6             | 6,680.0            | 20,213.6                                  | 14,060.0                           | 6.900.0                                   | 20,960.0                                        | 13.976.1                           | 6,900.0                                   | 20,876.1                                |\n| 0630000 Policy Coordination Services                                      | 1530.4                               | 65.0                                       | 1595.4               | 1702.5               | 80.0               |                                           | 1,618.6                            | 200.0                                     | 1,818.6                                         | 1,697.1                            | 200.0                                     | 1,897.1                                 |\n| 0632000 National Government Field Administration Services                 | 19.509.4                             | 347.0                                      | 19,856.4             | 20,550.2             | 591.6              | 21,141.8                                  | 21,474.7                           | 1,042.3                                   | 22,517.0                                        |                                    | 1,472.7                                   | 23,930.4                                |\n| 1252 State Law Oflice                                                     | 5,086.8                              | 300.0                                      | 5.386.8              | 5,630.9              | 300.0              | 5.930.9                                   | 5.916.4                            | 357.8                                     | 6,274.2                                         | 6,110.9                            | 489.3                                     | 6,600.2                                 |\n| 0606000 Legal Services                                                    | 4,336.6                              | 50.0                                       | 4,386.6              | 4,861.4              | 20.0               | 4,881.4                                   | 5,114.6                            | 100.0                                     |                                                 | 5.289.0                            | 120.0                                     | 5,409.0                                 |\n| 0607000 Governance; Legal Training and Constitutional Affairs             |                                      |                                            |                      |                      |                    |                                           |                                    |                                           |                                                 |                                    |                                           |                                         |\n|                                                                           | 750.2 250.0                          | 1,000.2                                    |                      | 769.6                | 280.0              | 1,049.6                                   | 801.8                              |                                           | 1,059.5                                         | 822.0                              | 369.3                                     | 1,191.3                                 |\n| 1253 State Department for Justice Human Rights and Constitutional Affairs | 1,020.4                              |                                            | 1,020.4              | 1,277.8              |                    | 1,277.8                                   | 1,243.7                            |                                           | 1,243.7                                         | 1,292.4                            |                                           | 1,292.4                                 |\n| 0607000 Governance; Legal Training and Constitutional Affairs             | 1,020.4                              |                                            | 1,020.4              |                      |                    |                                           |                                    |                                           |                                                 |                                    |                                           |                                         |\n| [Programme Governance; Human Rights and Constitutional Affairs            |                                      |                                            |                      | 1,277.8              |                    | 1,277.8                                   | 1,243.7                            |                                           | 1,243.7                                         | 1,292.4                            |                                           | 1,292.4                                 |\n|                                                                           | 25,2314                              | 1.700.0                                    | 26.9314              | 26.3845              |                    | 29.0144                                   | 21,7214                            | 21705                                     | 29.891.9                                        | 29.125.1                           | 8.152.9                                   | 32,278.0                                |\n| 0610000 Dispensation of Justice                                           |                                      | 1,700.0                                    | 26.937.4             | 26.384.5             | 2629.9             | 29.014.4                                  | 27,721.4                           | 2,170.5                                   | 29,891.9                                        | 29,125.1                           |                                           |                                         |\n| 1271 Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission                                | 4,320.0                              | 180.0                                      | 4.500.0              | 4520.0               | 1230               | 4,643.0                                   | 4828.7                             | 205.6                                     | 5.034.3                                         | 5.048.4                            | 281.3                                     | 5329.7                                  |\n| [0611000 Ethics and Anti-Corruption                                       | 4,320.0                              | 180.0                                      | 4,500.0              | 4,520.0              | 123.0              | 4,643.0                                   | 4,828.7                            | 205.6                                     | 5,034.3                                         | 5.048.4                            | 281.3                                     | 5,329.7                                 |\n| 1291 Oflice of the Director of Public Prosecutions                        | 4,395.6                              | 86.0                                       | 4.481.6              |                      | 491.0              | 5.7743                                    |                                    | 645                                       | 5,760.2                                         | 5919.3                             | 86.0                                      | 6,005.3                                 |\n| 0612000 Public Prosecution Services                                       | 4,395.6                              | 86.0                                       | 4,481.6              | 5.283.3              | 491.0              | 5.774.3                                   | 5.695.7                            | 64.5                                      | 5,760.2                                         | 5919.3                             | 86.0                                      | 6.005.3                                 |\n|                                                                           |                                      |                                            |                      | 2,323.0              |                    | 2323.0                                    |                                    |                                           | 2,422.6                                         | 2,463.9                            |                                           | 2,463.9                                 |\n| 0614000 Registration Regulation and Funding of Political Parties          | 2,487.0                              |                                            | 2,487.0              | 2,323.0              |                    | 2,323.0                                   | 2,422.6                            |                                           | 2,422.6                                         | 2,463.9                            |                                           | 2,463.9                                 |\n| 1321 Witness Protection Agency                                            | 841.2                                |                                            | 8412                 | 1.016.1              |                    | 1.016.1                                   | 1,031.9                            |                                           |                                                 | 1077.7                             |                                           | 1,077.7                                 |\n| 0615000 Witness Protection                                                | 841.2                                |                                            | 841.2                | 1,016.1              |                    | 1,016.1                                   | 1,031.9                            |                                           | 1,031.9                                         | 1,077.7                            |                                           | 1,077.7                                 |"},{"table_page":128,"section":"vi) Compliance with the Requirement to Maintain a Reasonable Degree of Predictability with respect to the Level of Tax Rates and Tax Bases","markdown":"| IsectorNote Programme..                                                | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Current   | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Capital   | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Iotal   | FY 2026/27.Current   | FY 2026/27.Capital   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2026/27.Iotal   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2027/28.Current   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2027/28.Capital   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2027/28.Iotal   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2028/29.Current   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2028/29.Capital   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2028/29.Iotal   |\n|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------|:---------------------|:---------------------|:----------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------|\n| [GOIERYAYCE; JUSIICE; LAW AND ORDER                                    | 264,118.5                            | 18,923.9                             | 283,042,3                          | 304,059.5            | 25,929.7             | 329,989.2                               | 310,983.7                                 | 28,268.5                                  |                                         | 312,676.5                                 | 32,199.8                                  | 344,876.3                               |\n| [2011 Kenya National Commission on Human Rights                        | 530.3                                |                                      | 530.3                              | 614.6                |                      | 614.6                                   | 593.9                                     |                                           | 593.9                                   | 618.3                                     |                                           | 618.3                                   |\n| [0616000 Protection and Promotion of Human Rights                      | 530.3                                |                                      | 530.3                              | 614.6                |                      | 614.6                                   | 593.9                                     |                                           | 593.9                                   | 618.3                                     |                                           | 618.3                                   |\n| [2031 Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission                  | 9,302.3                              | 30.0                                 | 9,332.3                            | 24,903.3             | 61.7                 | 24,965.1                                | 20,259.7                                  | 103.1                                     | 20,362.8                                | 4,909.6                                   | 141.1                                     | 5,050.7                                 |\n| [061 7000 Management of Electoral Processes                            | 9,302.3                              | 30.0                                 | 9,332.3                            | 24,903.3             | 61.7                 | 24,965.1                                |                                           | 103.1                                     | 20,362.8                                | 4,909.6                                   | 141.1                                     | 5,050.7                                 |\n| [0618000 Delimitation of Electoral Boundaries                          |                                      |                                      |                                    |                      |                      |                                         |                                           |                                           |                                         |                                           |                                           |                                         |\n| 2051 Judicial Service Commission                                       | 8424                                 |                                      | 8424                               | 9214                 |                      | 9214                                    | 966.4                                     |                                           | 966.4                                   |                                           |                                           | 1.007.1                                 |\n| [0619000 Judicial Oversight                                            | 8424                                 |                                      | 842.4                              | 927.4                |                      | 927.4                                   | 966.4                                     |                                           | 966.4                                   |                                           |                                           | 1,007.1                                 |\n| [2101 National Police Service Commission                               | 1390.8                               |                                      | 1,390.8                            | 1569.2               |                      | 1569.2                                  | 1,613.1                                   |                                           | 1613.1                                  | 1,674.0                                   |                                           | 1,674.0                                 |\n| [0620000 National Police Service Human Resource Management             | 1,390.8                              |                                      | 1,390.8                            | 1,569.2              |                      | 1,569.2                                 | 1,613.1                                   |                                           | 1,613.1                                 | 1,674.0                                   |                                           | 1,674.0                                 |\n| 2141 Yational Gender and Equality_Commission                           | 556.5                                |                                      |                                    | 7225                 |                      | 7225                                    | 711.1                                     |                                           |                                         | 739.0                                     |                                           | 739.0                                   |\n| [0621000 Promotion of Gender Equality and Freedom from [Discrimination | 556.5                                |                                      | 556.5                              | 7225                 |                      | 7225                                    | 711.1                                     |                                           | 711.1                                   | 739.0                                     |                                           | 739.0                                   |\n| 2151 Independent Policing Oversight Authority                          | 1315.9                               |                                      | 1315.9                             | 1469                 |                      | 1.469.4                                 | 1496.9                                    |                                           | 1.496.9                                 | 1559.3                                    |                                           | 15593                                   |\n| [0622000 Policing Oversight Services                                   | 1,315.9                              |                                      | 1,315.9                            | 1,469.4              |                      | 1,469.4                                 | 1,496.9                                   |                                           | 1,496.9                                 | 1,559.3                                   |                                           | 1,559.3                                 |\n| RELATIONS                                                              | 194,678.0                            | 126,825.1                            | 321,503.2                          | 224,281.0            | 130,717.9            | 354,998.9                               | 243,667.3                                 | 141,590.2                                 | 385,2575                                | 266,363.2                                 | 150,050.6                                 | 416,413.8                               |\n| [101l Erecutive Office of the President                                | 4,535.3                              | 1,034.0                              | 5,569.3                            | 5,6415               | 1,311.2              | 6.952.7                                 | 5,343.8                                   |                                           | 6,728.8                                 | 5,554.8                                   | 1,485.0                                   | 7,039.8                                 |\n|                                                                        | 767.6                                | 300.0                                | 1,067.6                            | 807.7                | 500.0                | 1,307.7                                 | 828.5                                     | 573.8                                     | 1,402.3                                 | 856.2                                     | 673.8                                     | 1,530.0                                 |\n| 0701000 General Administration Planning and Support Services           | 1,789.1                              | 480.0                                | 2,269.1                            | 2,674.9              | 576.2                | 3,251.1                                 | 2,256.9                                   | 576.2                                     | 2,833.1                                 | 2,344.1                                   | 576.2                                     | 2,920.3                                 |\n| [0703000 Government Advisory Services                                  | 1,066.7                              | 185.0                                | 1,251.7                            | 1,131.0              | 185.0                | 1,316.0                                 | 1,188.2                                   | 185.0                                     | 1,373.2                                 | 1,240.2                                   | 185.0                                     | 1,425.2                                 |\n| [0770000 Leadership and Coordination of Government Services            | 911.9                                | 69.0                                 | 980.9                              | 1,027.9              | 50.0                 | 1,077.9                                 | 1,070.2                                   | 50.0                                      | 1,120.2                                 |                                           | 50.0                                      | 1,164.3                                 |\n| 1012 Oflice of the Deputy President                                    | 2,972.1                              | 100.0                                | 3,072.1                            | 3,481.0              | 100.0                | 3,581.0                                 | 3,324.3                                   | 300.0                                     | 3,624.3                                 | 3,474.1                                   | 350.0                                     | 3,824.1                                 |\n| [0734000 Deputy_President Services                                     | 2972.1                               | 100.0                                | 3.072.1                            | 3481.0               | 100.0                | 3,581.0                                 | 3,324.3                                   | 300.0                                     |                                         | 3,474.1                                   | 350.0                                     |                                         |\n| [1013 Office of the Prime Cabinet Secretary                            | 356.6                                |                                      | 356.6                              | 827.6                |                      | 827.6                                   | 850.9                                     |                                           | 850.9                                   | 875.3                                     |                                           | 875.3                                   |\n| [0755000 Government Coordination and Supervision                       | 356.6                                |                                      | 356.6                              | 827.6                |                      | 827.6                                   | 850.9                                     |                                           | 850.9                                   | 875.3                                     |                                           | 875.3                                   |\n| 1014 State Department for Parliamentary _Affairs                       | 363.5                                |                                      | 363.5                              | 406.7                |                      | 406.7                                   | 423.0                                     |                                           | 423.0                                   | 439.9                                     |                                           | 439.9                                   |\n| [0759000 Parliamentary Liaison and Legislative Affairs                 | 67.4                                 |                                      | 67.4                               | 122.8                |                      | 122.8                                   | 135.0                                     |                                           | 135.0                                   | 139.4                                     |                                           | 139.4                                   |\n| J0760000 Policy Coordination and Strategy                              | 74.5                                 |                                      | 74.5                               | 83.8                 |                      | 83.8                                    | 99.7                                      |                                           | 99.7                                    | 105.5                                     |                                           | 105.5                                   |\n| [0761000 General Administration Planning and Support Services          | 221.6                                |                                      | 221.6                              | 200.1                |                      | 200.1                                   | 188.3                                     |                                           | 188.3                                   | 195.0                                     |                                           | 195.0                                   |\n| 1016 State Department for Cabinet Affairs                              | 228.7                                |                                      | 228.7                              | 298.8                |                      | 298.8                                   | 311.2                                     |                                           | 311.2                                   | 324.2                                     |                                           | 324.2                                   |\n| [0758000 Cabinet Affairs Services                                      | 228.7                                |                                      | 228.7                              | 298.8                |                      | 298.8                                   | 311.2                                     |                                           | 311.2                                   | 324.2                                     |                                           | 324.2                                   |\n| 1017 State House                                                       | 7,684.0                              | 894.9                                | 8,578.9                            | 10,651.8             | 1,027.0              | 11,678.8                                | 10,359.6                                  | 1,204.5                                   | 1l,564.1                                | 10.680.9                                  | 1,250.0                                   | 11,930.9                                |\n| [0704000 State House Affairs                                           | 7,684.0                              | 894.9                                | 8,578.9                            | 10,651.8             | 1,027.0              | 11,678.8                                | 10,359.6                                  | 1,204.5                                   | 11,564.1                                | 10,680.9                                  | 1,250.0                                   | 11,930.9                                |"},{"table_page":129,"section":"vi) Compliance with the Requirement to Maintain a Reasonable Degree of Predictability with respect to the Level of Tax Rates and Tax Bases","markdown":"| Sector Code..                                                          |                                                                      | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Current Capital   | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Iotal   | FY 2026/27.Current   | FY 2026/27.Capital   | FY 2026/27.Total   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2027/28.Current   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2027/28.Capital   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2027/28.Total   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2028/29.Current   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2028/29.Capital   | 2026 BPS Projections.FY 2028/29.Total   |\n|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------|:---------------------|:---------------------|:-------------------|:------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------|\n| 070                                                                    | RELAIIOYS                                                            | 126.825.1                                    |                                    | 321.503.2 224,281.0  | 130.717.9            | 354,.998.9         | 243,667.3                                 | 141.590.2                                 | 385.257.5                               |                                           | 150.050.6                                 | 416.413.8                               |\n|                                                                        | 1018 State Department for National Government Coordination           | 1,022.3                                      | 22.0 1,044.3                       | 944.2                | 130.0                | 1,074.2            | 993.0                                     | 158.0                                     | 1,151.0                                 | 1,043.9                                   | 28.0                                      | 1,071.9                                 |\n|                                                                        | 0755000 Government Coordination and Supervision                      | 1,022.3 22.0                                 | 1,044.3                            | 944.2                | 130.0                | 1,074.2            | 993.0                                     | 158.0                                     | 1,151.0                                 | 1,043.9                                   | 28.0                                      | 1,071.9                                 |\n| 1032 State Department for Devolution                                   |                                                                      | 1331.2 15.915.1                              | 17.246.4                           | 1373.1               | 1l,0115              | 12,384.6           | 1.,485.6                                  | 1552.2                                    | 3,037.8                                 | 1576.1                                    | 1452.2                                    | 3,028.3                                 |\n| 0712000 Devolution Services                                            |                                                                      | 15,915.1                                     | 17,246.4                           | 1.373.1              |                      | 12,384.6           | 1.485.6                                   |                                           |                                         | 1576.1                                    |                                           | 3.028.3                                 |\n|                                                                        | 1033 State Department for Special Programmes                         | 488.1                                        | 165.6 653.7                        | 687.2                | 165.0                | 852.2              | 723.8                                     | 263.0                                     | 986.8                                   | 762.2                                     | 320.0                                     | 1,082.2                                 |\n| Disaster Risk Management                                               | 488.1                                                                | 165.6                                        | 653.7                              | 687.2                | 165.0                | 852 2              | 723.8                                     | 263.0                                     | 986.8                                   | 762.2                                     | 320.0                                     | 1082 2                                  |\n| 1053 State Department for_Foreign Afairs                               |                                                                      |                                              | 25.364.1                           |                      | 2,356.3              | 26,714.4           | 25,396.5                                  | 3.050.0                                   | 28,446.5                                | 26,380.6                                  |                                           | 30,630.6                                |\n|                                                                        | 23.011.7 0714000 General Administration Planning and Suppon Services |                                              | 238.1 3,573.1                      | 3,631.6              | 36.3                 | 3,667.9            | 3,699.3                                   | 200.2                                     | 3,899.5                                 | 3,818.5                                   | 372.2                                     | 4,190.7                                 |\n| 0715000 Foreign Relation and Diplomacy                                 |                                                                      | 19.478.8                                     | 1958.3 21,4371                     | 20,369 8             | 2.300.0              | 22,669.8           | 21.080.2                                  | 2,500.0                                   |                                         | 21.892.6                                  | 3.500.0                                   |                                         |\n|                                                                        | 0741000 Economic and Commercial Diplomacy                            | 47.9                                         | 47.9                               | 52.0                 |                      | 52.0               | 55.0                                      |                                           | 55.0                                    | 60.0                                      |                                           | 60.0                                    |\n| 0742000 Foreign Policy Research Capacity Dev and Technical Cooperation |                                                                      | 150.0                                        | 306.1                              | 304.7                | 20.0                 | 324.7              | 562.0                                     | 349.8                                     | 911.8                                   |                                           | 377.8                                     | 987.3                                   |\n| 1054 State Department for Diaspora Affairs                             |                                                                      |                                              | 717.8                              | 844.6                |                      | 844.6              | 877.6                                     |                                           | 877.6                                   | 912.0                                     |                                           | 912.0                                   |\n| 0752000 Management of Diaspora Affairs                                 | 717.8                                                                |                                              | 717.8                              | 844.6                |                      | 844.6              | 877.6                                     |                                           | 877.6                                   | 912.0                                     |                                           | 912.0                                   |\n|                                                                        | 64,379.8                                                             | 42,499.6                                     | 106.879.4                          | 81551.0              | 50,.905.8            | 132,456.8          | 96,419.8                                  |                                           | 222,352 8                               | 112,828.7                                 |                                           | 246,049.4                               |\n| 0717000 General Administration Planning and Support Services           |                                                                      | 2,178.0                                      | 57,439.1                           | 71,439.2             | 6,206.0              | 77,645.2           | 82,937.1                                  | 1,141.8                                   | 84,078.9                                | 98,815.9                                  | 1,401.9                                   | 100,217.8                               |\n| 0718000 Public Financial Management                                    |                                                                      | 24.713.6                                     | 31.657.4                           | 7926.7               | 34.354.8             |                    | 11.224.4                                  | 124,458.9                                 |                                         | 11616.0                                   | 1315415                                   | 143.1575                                |\n| 0719000 Economic and Financial Policy Formulation [Management          | 1,546.7 and                                                          | 15,608.0                                     | 17,154.7                           | 1,556.4              |                      | 11,814.4           | 1,595.7                                   | 332.3                                     | 1,928.0                                 | 1,698.7                                   | 277.3                                     | 1976.0                                  |\n| 0720000 Market Competition                                             | 628.2                                                                |                                              | 628.2                              | 628.7                | 87.0                 | 715.7              | 662.6                                     |                                           | 662.6                                   | 698.1                                     |                                           |                                         |\n| 1072 State Department for Economic Planning                            | 3.679.5                                                              | 59.360.1                                     | 63.039.6                           |                      | 59.522.6             | 63,428.3           | 4.610.7                                   | 2,628.7                                   |                                         | 4.906.0                                   | 2.432.7                                   |                                         |\n| 0710000 Public Service Iransformation                                  |                                                                      |                                              |                                    |                      |                      |                    |                                           |                                           |                                         |                                           |                                           |                                         |\n| 07710000 Monitoring and Evaluation Services                            | 168.4                                                                | 6.0                                          | 174.4                              | 208.0                | 206.0                | 414.0              | 211.4                                     | 26.0                                      |                                         | 215.2                                     | 20.0                                      | 235.2                                   |\n| 0706000 Economic Policy and National Planning                          |                                                                      |                                              |                                    |                      |                      |                    |                                           |                                           |                                         |                                           |                                           |                                         |\n| 0707000 National Statistical Information Services                      | 1.058.2                                                              | 399.5                                        | 1457.7                             | 1,069.7              | 430.5                | 1500.2             | 1.151.8                                   | 2.165.7                                   | 33175                                   |                                           |                                           | 3.186.7                                 |\n| 0709000 General Administration Planning and Support Services           | 396.2                                                                |                                              | 396.2                              | 563.8                |                      | 563.8              | 588.1                                     |                                           | 588.1                                   | 609.4                                     |                                           | 609.4                                   |\n| 077400 Macro-economic Policy, National Planning and Research           | 1,337.3                                                              | 16.9                                         | 1,354.1                            |                      | 13.0                 | 1,478.8            | 1,552.9                                   | 156.0                                     | 1,708.9                                 | 1,692.4                                   | 176.2                                     | 1,868.6                                 |\n| 077500 Sectoral & Intergovernmental Development Planning Coordination  | 719.4                                                                | 58.937.7                                     | 59,657.2                           | 598.4                | 58,873.1             | 59,471.5           | 1,106.5                                   | 281.0                                     |                                         |                                           | 286.6                                     | 1438.8                                  |\n| 1073 State Department for Public Investments and Assets_ Vanagement    | 3,172.3                                                              | 736.0                                        | 3,908.3                            | 3,307.2              | 750.2                | 4,057.4            |                                           | 882.8                                     | 4,393.8                                 | 3,717.2                                   | 1,010.0                                   | 4,727.2                                 |\n| [Programme 1: Public Investment & Portfolio Management                 |                                                                      |                                              |                                    | 626.2                | 626.2                | 626.2              | 661.4                                     |                                           |                                         | 701.4                                     |                                           | 701.4                                   |\n| [Programme 2: Public Pensions & Retirement Benefit [Management         |                                                                      |                                              |                                    | 1,029.6              | 50.2                 | 1,079.8            | 1,095.4                                   | 50.2                                      | 1,145.6                                 | 1,164.1                                   | 50.2                                      | 1,214.3                                 |\n| [Programme 3: Government Assets Management                             |                                                                      |                                              |                                    | 1434.7               | 700.0                | 2134 7             | 1536.7                                    | 832.6                                     | 2,369.3                                 | 1623 2                                    | 959.8                                     | 2583.0                                  |\n| [Programme 4: General Administration Services                          | and Support Planning                                                 |                                              |                                    | 216.7                |                      | 216.7              | 217.5                                     |                                           | 217.5                                   | 228.5                                     |                                           | 228.5                                   |"},{"table_page":130,"section":"vi) Compliance with the Requirement to Maintain a Reasonable Degree of Predictability with respect to the Level of Tax Rates and Tax Bases","markdown":"|                                                               | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Current   | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Capital   | Sector |SectorNoteProgramme.Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Iotal   | Sector |SectorNoteProgramme.FY 2026/27.Current   | Sector |SectorNoteProgramme.FY 2026/27.Capital   | Sector |SectorNoteProgramme.FY 2026/27.Iotal   | Sector |SectorNoteProgramme.2026 BPS Projections FY 2027/28.Current   | Sector |SectorNoteProgramme.2026 BPS Projections FY 2027/28.Capital   | Sector |SectorNoteProgramme.2026 BPS Projections FY 2027/28.Iotal   | Sector |SectorNoteProgramme.FY 2028/29.Current   | Sector |SectorNoteProgramme.FY 2028/29.Capital   | Sector |SectorNoteProgramme.FY 2028/29.Iotal   |\n|:--------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------|\n| RELAIIOYS                                                     | 194,678.0                            | 126,825.1                            | 321,503.2                                                      | 224,281.0                                        | 130,717.9                                        | 354,998.9                                      | 243,667.3                                                             | 141,590.2                                                             | 385,257.5                                                           | 266,363.2                                        | 150,050.6                                        | 416,413.8                                      |\n| 1213 State Department for Public Senvice                      |                                      | 1856.4                               | 21,608.8                                                       | 23,726.4                                         | 15233                                            |                                                | 24.165.3                                                              | 1813.0                                                                |                                                                     | 25.308.4                                         | 1,887.0                                          |                                                |\n| 0710000 Public Service Transformation                         | 8.299.9                              | 1,741.4                              | 10,041.3                                                       |                                                  | 330                                              | 1,700.00                                       | 1,383.30                                                              | 404.5                                                                 | 1,787.80                                                            | 1,434.60                                         | 300                                              |                                                |\n| [Public Service Human Resource Management and [Development    |                                      |                                      |                                                                | 11,858.9                                         | 1,062.3                                          |                                                | 12,011.9                                                              | 1,177.2                                                               | 13,189.1                                                            | 12,157.7                                         | 1,587.0                                          | 13,744.7                                       |\n| 0709000 General Administration Planning and Support Services  | 1,602.8                              |                                      | 1,602.8                                                        | 394.9                                            | 394.9                                            | 394.9                                          | 442.8                                                                 | 442.8                                                                 | 442.8                                                               | 461.8                                            |                                                  | 461.8                                          |\n| 0747000 National Youth Service                                | 9,849.7                              | 115.0                                | 9,964.7                                                        | 10,102.6                                         | 131.0                                            | 10,233.6                                       | 10,327.3                                                              | 231.3                                                                 | 10,558.6                                                            | 11,254.3                                         |                                                  | 11,254.3                                       |\n| Parliament                                                    | 46,425.7                             |                                      | 47,990.7                                                       | 47.213.9                                         | 1,565.0                                          | 48,778.9                                       | 48,989.4                                                              | 2,065.0                                                               | 51,054.4                                                            | 50,838.7                                         | 2,065.0                                          | 52,903.7                                       |\n| 2061 Ibe Commission on Revenue Allocation                     | 370.0                                |                                      | 370.0                                                          | 510.6                                            |                                                  | 510.6                                          | 526.8                                                                 |                                                                       | 526.8                                                               | 544.2                                            |                                                  | 544.2                                          |\n| 0737000 Inter-Governmental Transfers and Financial Matters    | 370.0                                |                                      | 370.0                                                          | 510.6                                            |                                                  | 510.6                                          | 526.8                                                                 |                                                                       | 526.8                                                               | 544.2                                            |                                                  | 544.2                                          |\n| 2071 Public Service Commission                                | 3,561.7                              |                                      | 3,561.7                                                        | 3,640.6                                          | 50.0                                             | 3,690.6                                        | 3,698.3                                                               | 55.0                                                                  | 3,753.3                                                             | 3,758.6                                          |                                                  | 3,758.6                                        |\n| [0725000 General Administration Planning and Support Services | 916.3                                |                                      | 916.3                                                          | 992.9                                            | 50.0                                             | 1,042.9                                        | 1,027.0                                                               | 55.0                                                                  | 1,082.0                                                             | 1,064.3                                          |                                                  | 1,064.3                                        |\n| 0726000 Human Resource management and Development             | 2,416.6                              |                                      | 2,416.6                                                        | 2,409.2                                          |                                                  | 2,409.2                                        | 2,425.0                                                               |                                                                       | 2,425.0                                                             | 2,439.8                                          |                                                  | 2,439.8                                        |\n| 0727000 Governance and National Values                        | 168.5                                |                                      | 168.5                                                          | 142.1                                            |                                                  | 142.1                                          | 146.8                                                                 |                                                                       | 146.8                                                               | 151.7                                            |                                                  | 151.7                                          |\n| 0744000 Performance and Productivity Management               | 39.3                                 |                                      | 39.3                                                           | 66.8                                             |                                                  | 66.8                                           | 68.8                                                                  |                                                                       | 68.8                                                                | 71.0                                             |                                                  | 71.0                                           |\n| 075000 Administration of Quasi-Judicial Functions             | 21.0                                 |                                      | 21.0                                                           | 29.6                                             |                                                  | 29.6                                           | 30.7                                                                  |                                                                       | 30.7                                                                | 31.8                                             |                                                  | 31.8                                           |\n| 2081 Salaries and Remuneration Commission                     | 751.7                                |                                      | 751.7                                                          | 790.9                                            |                                                  | 790.9                                          | 823.2                                                                 |                                                                       | 823.2                                                               | 857.0                                            |                                                  | 857.0                                          |\n| 0728000 Salaries and Remuneration Management                  | 751.7                                |                                      | 751.7                                                          | 790.9                                            |                                                  | 790.9                                          | 823.2                                                                 |                                                                       | 823.2                                                               | 857.0                                            |                                                  | 857.0                                          |\n|                                                               | 8.359.0                              | 330.0                                | 8,689.0                                                        | 8,476.3                                          | 300.0                                            | 8,776.3                                        | 9.128.8                                                               | 300.0                                                                 |                                                                     | 9.812.6                                          | 300.0                                            | 10.112.6                                       |\n| 0729000 Audit Services                                        | 8,359.0                              | 330.0                                | 8,689.0                                                        | 8,476.3                                          | 300.0                                            | 8,776.3                                        | 9,128.8                                                               | 300.0                                                                 | 9,428.8                                                             | 9,812.6                                          | 300.0                                            | 10,112.6                                       |\n| 2121 Oflice of the Controller of Budget                       | 834.1                                |                                      | 834.1                                                          | 913.7                                            |                                                  | 913.7                                          | 948.1                                                                 |                                                                       | 948.1                                                               | 983.7                                            |                                                  | 983.7                                          |\n| 0730000 Control and Management of Public finances             | 834.1                                |                                      | 834.1                                                          | 913.7                                            |                                                  | 913.7                                          | 948.1                                                                 |                                                                       | 948.1                                                               | 983.7                                            |                                                  | 983.7                                          |\n| 2131 Ibe Commission on Administrative Justice                 | 674.2                                |                                      | 674.2                                                          | 730.1                                            |                                                  | 730.1                                          | 756.6                                                                 |                                                                       | 756.6                                                               | 784.1                                            |                                                  | 784.1                                          |\n| 0731000 Promotion of Administrative Justice                   | 674.2                                |                                      | 674.2                                                          | 730.1                                            |                                                  | 730.1                                          | 756.6                                                                 |                                                                       | 756.6                                                               | 784.1                                            |                                                  | 784.1                                          |\n| NAIIONAL SECURITY                                             | 248,836.2                            | 4,934.0                              | 253,770.2                                                      | 292,049.3                                        | 7.934.0                                          | 299,983.3                                      | 281,321.4                                                             | 13,934.0                                                              | 295,255.4                                                           | 293,5415                                         | 18,934.0                                         | 312,475.5                                      |\n| 1041 Ministuy of Defence                                      |                                      | 4.934.0                              | 202,322.9                                                      |                                                  | 7.934.0                                          | 241.3663                                       | 224,046.4                                                             | 13.934.0                                                              | 237.980.4                                                           | 233,.804.5                                       | 18.934.0                                         | 252,738.5                                      |\n| 0801000 Defence                                               | 184,991.9                            | 4,734.0                              | 189,725.9                                                      | 220,007.1                                        |                                                  | 227,641.1                                      | 211,136.6                                                             | 13,334.0                                                              | 224,470.6                                                           | 221.508.8                                        | 18.134.0                                         | 239,642.8                                      |\n| 0802000 Civd Aid                                              | 335.0                                |                                      | 335.0                                                          | 335.0                                            |                                                  | 335.0                                          | 341.0                                                                 |                                                                       | 341.0                                                               | 355.8                                            |                                                  | 355.8                                          |\n|                                                               | 2919.7                               |                                      | 2,919.7                                                        | 3,241.8                                          |                                                  | 3,241.8                                        | 3,341.4                                                               |                                                                       | 3,341.4                                                             | 3,444.5                                          |                                                  | 3,444.5                                        |\n| 0805000 National Space Management                             |                                      |                                      |                                                                |                                                  |                                                  |                                                |                                                                       |                                                                       |                                                                     |                                                  |                                                  |                                                |\n| 0806000 Defence Industrialization                             | 9,142.3                              | 200.0                                | 9,342.3                                                        | 9,848.4                                          | 300.0                                            |                                                | 9,2274                                                                | 600.0                                                                 |                                                                     | 8,495.4                                          | 800.0                                            | 9,295.4                                        |\n| 1281 Yational Intelligence Service                            |                                      |                                      |                                                                | 58.6170                                          |                                                  | 58,617.0                                       |                                                                       |                                                                       |                                                                     | 59,7370                                          |                                                  | 59,7370                                        |\n| 0804000 National Security Intelligence                        | 51,447.2                             |                                      | 51,447.2                                                       | 58,617.0                                         |                                                  | 58,617.0                                       | 57,275.0                                                              |                                                                       | 57,275.0                                                            | 59.737.0                                         |                                                  |                                                |"},{"table_page":131,"section":"vi) Compliance with the Requirement to Maintain a Reasonable Degree of Predictability with respect to the Level of Tax Rates and Tax Bases","markdown":"| Sector |SectorNote Programme.Code.                                       | Code.Current Capital   | Code.Iotal   | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Current   | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Capital   | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Iotal   | 2026 BPS Projections FY 2027/28.Current   | 2026 BPS Projections FY 2027/28.Capital   | 2026 BPS Projections FY 2027/28.   | FY 2028/29.Iotal   | FY 2028/29.Current   | FY 2028/29.Capital   | FY 2028/29.Iotal   |\n|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------|:-------------|:-------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------|:-------------------|:---------------------|:---------------------|:-------------------|\n| SOCIAL PROIECTIOX CULIURE AND RECREATIO                                  | 54,145.3               | 24,849.1     | 78,994.4                             | 60,732.0                             | 26,492.7                           |                                           | 55,847.6                                  | 21534.8                            | 83,382,3           | 61,556.6             | 28,806.3             | 90,362.9           |\n| 1132 State Department for Sports                                         | 1.626.8                | 15,835.0     |                                      | 7.384.9                              | 18.108.9                           | 25.493.7                                  | 19210                                     | 18.900.0                           | 20,821.0           | 2,044.8              | 19.901.7             | 21.946.5           |\n| 0901000 Sports                                                           | 1,626.8                | 15,835.0     | 17,461.8                             | 7,384.9                              | 18,108.9                           | 25,493.7                                  | 1921.0                                    | 18.900.0                           | 20,821.0           | 2044.8               | 19.901.7             | 21,946.5           |\n| 1134 State Department for Culture and Heritage                           | 2,772.6                | 813.0        | 3,585.6                              | 2,840.7                              | 144.0                              | 2984.8                                    | 2,952.9                                   | 125.0                              | 3,077.9            | 3.132.6              | 52.0                 | 3.184.6            |\n| 0902000 Culture_Heritage                                                 | 1642 4                 | 131.0        | 1,773.4                              | 1,646.8                              | 54.7                               | 1,701.5                                   | 1,741.7                                   | 75.0                               | 1,816.7            | 1,841.4              | 10.0                 | 1,851.4            |\n| 0903000 The Arts                                                         | 254.0                  | 500.0        | 754.0                                | 256.8                                | 24.4                               | 281.1                                     | 268.6                                     |                                    | 268.6              | 280.9                |                      | 280.9              |\n| 0904000 Library Services                                                 | 467.8                  | 145.0        | 612.8                                | 472.9                                |                                    | 472.9                                     | 504.3                                     |                                    | 504.3              | 539.3                |                      | 539.3              |\n| 0905000 General Administration Planning Support Services and             | 136.3                  |              | 136.3                                | 139.3                                |                                    | 139.3                                     | 146.6                                     |                                    | 146.6              | 162.0                |                      | 162.0              |\n| 0916000 Public Records Mangement                                         | 124 2                  | 37.0         | 161.1                                | 325.0                                | 65.0                               | 390.0                                     | 291.6                                     | 50.0                               | 341.6              | 309.0                | 42.0                 | 351.0              |\n| 0917000 Lottery Control Licensing Regulations and                        | 148.0                  |              | 148.0                                |                                      |                                    |                                           |                                           |                                    |                    |                      |                      |                    |\n| 1135 State Department for Youth Affairs and Creative Economy             | 2,228.6                | 2,672.4      | 4,901.0                              | 2,581.3                              | 2,201.4                            | 4,782.8                                   | 2,705.4                                   | 2,392,3                            | 5,097.7            | 2,855.5              | 2,488.7              | 5,344.3            |\n|                                                                          | 811.2                  | 454.7        | 1,265.9                              | 814.6                                | 33.5                               | 848.2                                     | 880.3                                     |                                    | 880.3              | 948.0                |                      | 948.0              |\n| [0711000 Youth Empowerment Services                                      | 162.8                  | 481.4        | 644.2                                | 491.8                                |                                    | 491.8                                     | 520.0                                     | 139.3                              | 659.4              | 568.6                | 262.8                | 831.4              |\n| 0748000 Youth Development Services                                       | 661.7                  | 1,736.3      | 2,398.0                              | 694.3                                | 2,167.9                            | 2,862.3                                   | 706.0                                     |                                    | 2,958.9            | 726.9                | 2,225.9              |                    |\n| 0749000 General Administration Planning and Support Services             | 593.0                  |              | 593.0                                | 580.6                                |                                    | 580.6                                     | 599.1                                     |                                    | 599.1              | 612.0                |                      | 612.0              |\n| 1184 State Department for Labour and Skills Development                  | 4,295.2                | 768.6        | 5,063.8                              | 4467.0                               | 1,065.3                            | 5,532.3                                   | 4.499.1                                   | 1,287.2                            | 5,786.3            |                      | 1.4375               | 5,976.3            |\n| 0910000 General Administration Planning and Support Services             | 474.9                  |              | 474.9                                | 534.2                                |                                    | 534.2                                     | 541.8                                     |                                    | 541.8              | 536.9                |                      | 536.9              |\n| 0906000 Labour; Employment and Safety_Services                           | 1,174.7                | 211.6        | 1,386.4                              | 1,269.2                              | 246.3                              | 15155                                     | 1,287.5                                   | 273.5                              | 1,561.0            | 1,325.7              | 303.8                | 1,629.4            |\n| 0907000 Manpower Development Industrial Skills & Productivity_Management | 2,645.5                | 557.0        | 3,202.5                              | 2,663.6                              | 819.0                              |                                           | 2,669.8                                   | 1,013.7                            | 3,683.5            | 2,676.2              | 1,133.7              |                    |\n| 1185 State Department for Social Protection and Senior Citizens Affairs  | 29,132.9               | 187.1        | 29,320.0                             | 29,160.3                             | 708.3                              | 29,868.6                                  | 29,361.2                                  | 730.3                              | 30,091.5           | 34,309.3             | 776.3                | 35,085.6           |\n| 0908000 Social Development and Children Services                         |                        | 39.0         |                                      |                                      |                                    |                                           |                                           |                                    |                    |                      |                      |                    |\n| 0909000 National Social Safety Net                                       |                        | 148.1        | 27,295.6                             | 27,179.5                             | 540.3                              | 27,719.8                                  | 27,358.1                                  | 540.3                              | 27,898.4           | 32.230.3             | 540.3                | 32,770.6           |\n| 0914000 General Administration Planning and Support Services             | 360.0                  |              | 360.0                                | 390.9                                |                                    | 390.9                                     | 377.8                                     |                                    | 377.8              | 398.2                |                      | 398.2              |\n| [Programme: Social Development and Disabllity_ Inclusion                 |                        |              |                                      | 1,589.8                              | 168.0                              | 1,757.8                                   | 1,625.3                                   | 190.0                              | 1,815.3            | 1,680.8              | 236.0                | 1,916.8            |\n| 1186 State Department for Children Services 12,074.1                     |                        | 244.0        | 12,318.1                             | 12,170.9                             | 140.0                              | 12,310.9                                  | 12,323.6                                  | 100.0                              | 12,423.6           | 12,536.8             | 150.0                | 12,686.8           |\n| 0908000 Social Development and Children Services                         | 2,606.1                | 244.0        | 2,850.1                              |                                      |                                    |                                           |                                           |                                    |                    |                      |                      |                    |\n| 0909000 National Social Safety Net 9,310.7                               |                        |              | 9,310.7                              |                                      |                                    |                                           |                                           |                                    |                    |                      |                      |                    |\n| 157.3                                                                    |                        |              | 1573                                 |                                      |                                    |                                           |                                           |                                    |                    |                      |                      |                    |\n|                                                                          |                        |              |                                      | 12,170.9                             | 140.0                              | 12,310.9                                  | 12,323.6                                  | 100.0                              | 12,423.6           | 12,536.8             | 150.0                | 12,686.8           |\n| 1212 State Department for Gender and Affirmative 2,015.2                 |                        | 4,328.9      | 6,344.1                              | 2,127.0                              | 4,124.7                            | 6,251.7                                   | 2,084.4                                   | 4,000.0                            | 6,084.4            | 2,138.9              | 4,000.0              | 6,138.9            |\n| Action [0911000 Community_Development 940.8                              |                        | 4,000.0      | 4,940.8                              | 940.0                                | 4,000.0                            | 4,940.0                                   | 940.0                                     | 4.000.0                            | 4,940.0            | 940.0                | 4.000.0              | 4,940.0            |\n| 0912000 Gender Empowerment                                               | 833.0                  | 328.9        | 1,161.9                              | 955.1                                | 124.7                              | 1,079.8                                   | 903.6                                     |                                    | 903.6              | 946.4                |                      | 946.4              |\n| 0913000 General Administration Planning and Support Services             | 241.4                  |              | 241.4                                | 231.9                                |                                    | 231.9                                     | 240.8                                     |                                    | 240.8              | 2525                 |                      | 2525               |"},{"table_page":132,"section":"vi) Compliance with the Requirement to Maintain a Reasonable Degree of Predictability with respect to the Level of Tax Rates and Tax Bases","markdown":"| Sector |Sector ote Programme..                                     | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Current   | Approved FY 2025/26 Budget.Capital   | Iotal Current   | Capital     | Iotal     | FY 2027/28.Current   | FY 2027/28.Capital   | FY 2027/28.   | Iotal       | Current     | Capital     | Iotal       |\n|:-------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:----------------|:------------|:----------|:---------------------|:---------------------|:--------------|:------------|:------------|:------------|:------------|\n| JAIURAL RESOURCES                                                  | 33,879.1                             | 61,9875                              | 95,866.7        | 36,210.0    | 70,498.0  | 106,708.0            | 39,081.0             | 83,591.0      | 122,672.0   | 42,176.0    | 120,954.0   | 163,130.0   |\n| 1104 State Department for Irrigation                               | 955.2                                | 6,593.2                              | 7,548.4         | 943.0       | 7,528.0   | 8,471.0              | 1,039.0              | 8,978.0       | 10,017.0    | 1,085.0     | 10,692.0    | 1l,777.0    |\n| [1014000 Irrigation [Land Reclamation and                          | 761.4                                | 6,348.2                              | 7,109.6         |             |           |                      |                      |               |             |             |             |             |\n| 1015000 Water Storage and Flood Control                            |                                      |                                      |                 |             |           |                      |                      |               |             |             |             |             |\n| 1022000 Water Harvesting and for Irrigation Storage                | 20.9                                 | 245.0                                | 265.9           |             |           |                      |                      |               |             |             |             |             |\n| [1023000 General Administration Planning_and Support Services      | 172.9                                |                                      | 172.9           | 168.0       | 80.0      | 248.0                | 179.0                | 125.0         | 304.0       | 186.0       | 182.0       | 368.0       |\n| Irigation Development & Rehablitation                              |                                      |                                      | 723.0           | 6,000.0     |           | 6,723.0              | 803.0                | 6,994.0       |             | 840.0       | 8,616.0     | 9,456.0     |\n| P2.  Land Reclamation and Clmate Reslience Irrigation [Development |                                      |                                      |                 | 52.0        | 1,448.0   | 1,500.0              | 57.0                 | 1,859.0       | 1916.0      | 59.0        | 1,894.0     | 1,953.0     |\n|                                                                    | 6,777.9                              | 47,176.4                             | 53,954.3        | 7,343.0     | 49,503.0  | 56,846.0             |                      | 59,187.0      | 67,129.0    |             | 88,373.0    | 96,943.0    |\n| [1001000 General Administration Planning and Support Services      | 723.9                                | 115.0                                | 838.9           | 845.0       | 200.0     | 1,045.0              | 906.0                | 708.0         | 1,614.0     | 974.0       | 612.0       | 1,586.0     |\n| 1004000 Water Resources Management                                 | 2,041.2                              | 14,437.0                             | 16,478.2        | 2,002.0     | 20,433.0  | 22,435.0             | 2,056.0              | 15,282.0      | 17,338.0    | 2,171.0     | 16.766.0    | 18,937.0    |\n| 1017000 Water and Sewerage Infrastructure Development              | 3.640.7                              |                                      | 34,721.2        | 4,121.0     | 27,364.0  | 31,485.0             | 4557.0               | 39,678.0      | 44,235.0    | 4971.0      | 61,594.0    | 66.565.0    |\n| 1015000 Water Storage and Flood Control                            | 372.2                                | 1543.9                               | 1916.1          | 375.0       | 1506.0    | 1,881.0              | 423.0                | 3,519.0       |             | 454.0       | 9,401.0     | 9,855.0     |\n| 1192 State Department for Mining                                   | 1,363.4                              | 267.2                                | 1,630.6         | 1,539.0     | 478.0     | 2,017.0              | 1,588.0              | 633.0         |             | 1,667.0     | 832.0       | 2,499.0     |\n| [1007000 General Administration Planning and Support Services      | 375.1                                |                                      | 375.1           | 459.0       | 459.0     |                      | 446.0                |               | 446.0       | 465.0       |             | 465.0       |\n| 1009000 Mineral Resources Management                               | 617.8                                | 71.2                                 | 688.9           | 656.0       | 203.0     | 859.0                | 663.0                | 229.0         | 892.0       | 670.0       | 213.0       | 883.0       |\n| 1021000 Geological Geoinformation Management Survey and            | 370.6                                | 196.0                                | 566.5           | 424.0       | 275.0     | 699.0                | 479.0                | 404.0         | 883.0       | 532.0       | 619.0       | 1,151.0     |\n| 1203 State Department for Wildlife                                 | 11,9555                              | 2,404.1                              | 14.359.6        | 13.250.0    | 1858.0    | 15.108.0             |                      |               | 17.051.0    | 15.8110     |             | 19,7410     |\n| 1019000 Wildlife Conservation and Management                       | 11,9555                              | 2,404.1                              | 14,359.6        | 13,250.0    | 1.858.0   | 15,108.0             | 14,411.0             | 2,640.0       | 17,051.0    | 15,811.0    | 3930.0      | 19,741.0    |\n| 1331 State Department for Environment € Climate Change             | 3,894.9                              | 1,934.7                              | 5,829.6         |             | 2,605.0   | 6,708.0              | 4,432.0              | 2,898.0       | 7,330.0     | 4,728.0     | 3,520.0     |             |\n| 1002000 Environment Management and Protection                      | 2,036.2                              | 1.705.7                              | 3.741.9         | 2127.0      | 2,241.0   | 4,368.0              | 2,414.0              | 2561.0        | 4975.0      | 2,644.0     | 3.050.0     | 5.694.0     |\n| [1010ooo General Administration_Planning and Support Services      |                                      |                                      | 486 2           | 460.0       | 30.0      | 490.0                | 471.0                | 50.0          | 5210        | 4840        | 70.0        | 5540        |\n| 1012000 Meteorological Services                                    | 1372.6                               | 229.0                                | 1601.6          | 1,516.0     | 334.0     | 1.850.0              | 1,547.0              | 287.0         | 1,834.0     | 1.600.0     | 400.0       | 2,000.0     |\n| 1332 State Department for Forestry                                 | 8,932.2                              | 3,612.0                              | 12,544.2        | 9,032.0     | 8,526.0   | 17,558.0             | 9,669.0              | 9,255.0       | 18,924.0    | 10,315.0    | 13,607.0    | 23,922.0    |\n| 1018000 Forests Development Management and Conservation            | 8,761.7                              | 3,6120                               | 12,373.8        | 8,833.0     | 8,526.0   | 17,359.0             | 9,439.0              | 9,255.0       | 18,694.0    | 10,081.0    | 13,607.0    | 23,688.0    |\n| 1024000 Agroforestry and Commercial Forestry Development           | 15.3                                 |                                      | 15.3            | 27.0        |           | 27.0                 | 45.0                 |               | 45.0        | 49.0        |             | 49.0        |\n| [1025000 General Administration Planning Support Services and      | 155.1                                |                                      | 155.1           | 172.0       |           | 172.0                | 185.0                |               | 185.0       | 185.0       |             | 185.0       |\n| IOIAL                                                              | 1,804,706.3                          | 744.837.7                            | 2,549,544.0     | 2,021,097.8 | 846.324.8 | 2,867,422.5          | 2,108,425.3          | 1.187,424.6   | 3,295,849.8 | 2,214,866.8 | 1,254,201.1 | 3,469,067.9 |"},{"table_page":133,"section":"Annex Table 5: Policy Resolutions by Parliament on Previous Budget Policy Statements","markdown":"| No.                                   | Resolution                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Action taken                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |\n|:--------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n| A. Policy Resolutions on the 2025 BPS | A. Policy Resolutions on the 2025 BPS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | A. Policy Resolutions on the 2025 BPS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |\n| 1.                                    | Further to the resolution of the House during the approval of FY 2024/25 Estimates on reengineering the Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS), the National Treasury submits geographical information of development projects per county and constituency by 30th April, 2025.                                                                         | The Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) has established a standardized chart of accounts that includes a segment dedicated to geographical location, which is essential for budgeting purposes. Counties are mandated to allocate budgets for projects by specifying the cost center associated with the geographical location. This functionality has been integrated into the system, where a designated section for geographical codes constitutes a segment of the budget line for each project |\n| 2.                                    | The Cabinet Secretary for the National Treasury and Economic Planning ensures that projects that are nearing completion are prioritized for resource allocation. This should include a list of development projects that are earmarked for completion in FY 2025/26 for all Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs).                                                    | During the finalization of the FY 2025/26 Budget, the National Treasury prioritized funding to projects that are nearing completion. A list of these projects, which are set to be completed in FY 2025/26 and the Medium- Term, is provided alongside the submitted FY 2025/26 Budget in accordance with this resolution.                                                                                                                                                                                                 |\n| 3.                                    | Given that several policy pronouncements in the BPS have not been funded, before submission of the Budget Estimates for FY 2025/26 to the National Assembly, the Cabinet Secretary for the National Treasury and Economic Planning ensures that these unfunded priorities have been factored within the approved ceilings as provided in the Fourth Schedule to the Report. | In light of the fiscal consolidation policy and the existing resource constraints, the National Treasury has prioritized critical expenditures in the FY 2025/26 Budget. Any priority expenditure not included in the FY 2025/26 Budget will be considered during the preparation of FY 2026/27 and the Medium-Term Budget.                                                                                                                                                                                                |"},{"table_page":134,"section":"Annex Table 5: Policy Resolutions by Parliament on Previous Budget Policy Statements","markdown":"|   No. | Resolution                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Action taken                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |\n|------:|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|     4 | On submission of the Budget Estimates for FY 2025/26, the Cabinet Secretary for the National Treasury and Economic Planning submits to the National Assembly a statement on the fiscal impact of adopting zero-based budgeting.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | In accordance with the Cabinet directive, MDAs are to implement Zero- Based Budgeting (ZBB) starting from FY2025/26. The National Treasury has adopted the ZBB, ensuring that all expenditures are thoroughly costed and justified for funding. To facilitate the implementation of Zero-Based Budgeting, the National Treasury has developed a Costing Tool that is now integrated into the IFMIS.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |\n|     5 | To entrench oversight of Appropriations in Aid (AIA) and earmarked public funds, the National Treasury: a) collates and reports on all AIA generated by non-commercial national government entities, including fees, charges, levies, together with related expenditure, projects, and programs and provide the report to the National Assembly by 30th April, 2025; b) Reports to the National Assembly on all extra budgetary funds realized and related expenditure by 30th April, 2025; c) Proposes changes to the Controller of Budget Act to provide for the Controller of Budget to approve the utilization of A-I-A and related expenditure by September 2025; and d) Identifies and proposes legislation to the National Assembly on the overall framework for the financial management of AIA, including the repeal of non-critical public funds and AIA mandates by September 2025. | The details of AIA projections for FY 2025/26 by non-commercial government entities and their related expenditures are as provided in the Itemized Budget Estimates for FY 2025/26 under their specific Votes and Heads. The National Treasury will develop framework for the financial management of AIA, including the repeal of non-critical public funds and AIA mandates by September 2025 as resolved.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |\n|     6 | Given the government reliance on several payment systems for various functions such as capitation for schools, salaries payments, transfer to counties, and exchequer releases, the Cabinet Secretary for the National Treasury and Economic Planning provides to Parliament with an update on integration of government payment systems within the Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) ecosystem to enhance transparency and accountability by the 30 th April, 2025.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Ministries, Departments, Agencies, and Counties (MDCAs) utilize the IFMIS for payment processing, which integrates with KRA iTax and the CBK core banking system. IFMIS facilitates budget uploads and transaction processing, while KRA's iTax generates Paymen t Registration Numbers (PRN) to alert suppliers about tax obligations. CBK serves as the disbursement platform for funds. Key concerns have been addressed as outlined below: i) Capitation funding for schools is administered through the Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS). The Ministry of Education does not utilize any alternative payment |"},{"table_page":135,"section":"Annex Table 5: Policy Resolutions by Parliament on Previous Budget Policy Statements","markdown":"| No.   | Resolution                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | Action taken                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |\n|:------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | systems. The National Education Management Information System (NEMIS) is solely designated for the maintenance of student data and is not intended for processing payments; ii) Processing of salaries for public servants is conducted through the Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS). The National Treasury is currently finalizing the integration between IFMIS and the Human Resource Integrated System (HRIS) to ensure seamless maintenance of employee data and efficient payroll processing; iii) Transfer of equitable shares to Counties is facilitated through the Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS). However, the notification regarding the funds transferred to the County Revenue Fund is conducted manually; iv) Processing of Exchequer for MDAs is efficiently automated through the IFMIS; and v) National Treasury is currently engaged in the integration of the |\n| 7.    | On submission of the Budget Estimates for FY 2025/26, the Cabinet Secretary for the National Treasury and Economic Planning submits a statement to the National Assembly on timelines and fiscal impact of merging, restructuring, and winding up state entities in line with the Cabinet Decision of 21 st January 2025. | Debt Management System and E-Citizen with the IFMIS In light of the Cabinet Decision dated 21 st January 2025, a Multi-Agency Technical Working Committee was established to execute the State Corporations' Reforms as sanctioned by the Cabinet. This Committee includes representatives from the Executive Office of the President, the State Department for Public Service, the Office of the Attorney General/StateLaw Office, the State Corporations Advisory Committee, and the Inspectorate of State Corporations. The reforms were implemented in two phases, with the entire process completed by the end of FY 2024/25.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |\n| 8.    | On submission of the Budget Estimates for FY 2025/26, the Intergovernmental Relations Technical Committee (IGRTC) submits a statement to the National Assembly on fiscal impact and timelines for implementation of Gazette Notice No. Vol. CXXVI-No. 219 of 2024 on the delineation and transfer of devolved functions.  | Following the publication of the re-validated sector exercise reports on the delineation of functions, IGRTC published the respective Gazette Notices (No. 16472 to 16483) on 16 th December, 2024 on the delineated functions. Additionally, the IGRTC through the letter dated 26 th March 2025, Ref: IGR/FIN/8/1/VOL IV (63) provided the status of this resolution. Annex 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |"},{"table_page":136,"section":"Annex Table 5: Policy Resolutions by Parliament on Previous Budget Policy Statements","markdown":"| No.                                   | Resolution                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | Action taken                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |\n|:--------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | of this Budget Summary provides a Statement on fiscal impact and timelines for implementation of Gazette Notice No. Vol. CXXVI-No. 219 of 2024 on the delineation and transfer of devolved functions.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |\n| 9.                                    | On submission of the Budget Estimates for FY 2025/26, the Cabinet Secretary for the National Treasury and Economic Planning provides a list of all Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) projects to be implemented in FY 2025/26.                                                                          | A list of all Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) projects was provided in Annex 3 of the Budget Summary for the FY 2025/26.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |\n| 10.                                   | By 30 th June, 2025, the National Treasury submits a comprehensive report detailing the implementation status of the new digitized pension system. Additionally, the report should include an action plan to clear pension arrears, ensure timely contributions, and enhance administrative efficiency. | In line with the ongoing Public Service Pension Schemes (PSPS) reforms, the National Treasury is undertaking the comprehensive re-engineering of the Pension Management Information System (PMIS) to improve functionality, operational efficiency, data reliability. The reform aim to deliver a fully integrated Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) solution that automates pension administration processes, eliminates manual interfaces, strengthens internal controls, and enhances service delivery to pensioners and beneficiaries. Development of the new system has been completed, and pilot implementation is ongoing across selected Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs). Complementary activities include user training, data migration, and system stabilization, ahead of phased roll-out across the wider public service. Upon full implementation, the system is expected to significantly improve timeliness of pension processing, contribution management, compliance oversight, and reporting, thereby reinforcing confidence in the public service pension framework. |\n| B. Policy Resolutions on the 2024 BPS | B. Policy Resolutions on the 2024 BPS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | B. Policy Resolutions on the 2024 BPS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |\n| 11.                                   | Given the need to link the Bottom-up Economic Transformation Agenda to the Vision 2030, the Cabinet Secretary for National Treasury and Economic Planning to submit the Fourth Medium Term Plan of the Vision 2030 to the National Assembly before submission of the Budget Estimates for FY 2024/25.   | The National Treasury and Economic Planning submitted the Fourth Medium Term Plan of Vision 2030 to the National Assembly and was officially launched by H.E. the President on 21st March 2024.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |"},{"table_page":137,"section":"Annex Table 5: Policy Resolutions by Parliament on Previous Budget Policy Statements","markdown":"| Resolution                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Action taken                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |\n|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n| 12. The National Treasury to prepare guidelines for proper costing of government policies, programmes and projects to minimize discrepancies between the planned and actual resource requirements before the preparation of the 2025 BPS.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | The National Treasury prepared a Budget Manual that covers among others a chapter on budget costing. Further, a budget costing tool has been prepared in the IFMIS system and PFM officials have been trained on the same. The 2025 BPS will be prepared after budget costing is conducted within the budget costing tool.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |\n| 13. In view of delayed compensation for land acquired from individuals by the Government for various projects, the National Treasury should prioritize payments for land compensation in the FY 2024/25 estimates, before they are submitted to the National Assembly. Going forward, no Government project should commence before the owners of such land are compensated.                                                                                                                                                                                                         | The Government will continue prioritize payment of pending land compensation within the approved allocations in the FY 2024/25 Budget. To ensure compliance with this requirement, the Public Investment Management (PIM) Regulations, 2022 was enacted and requires Ministries, Departments and Agencies to avail land for any project as a prerequisite before such projects are approved and funded by the National Treasury.                                                                                                                                                                                                    |\n| 14. Given the funding challenges facing the Department of Immigration and Citizen Services on issuance of documents such as Passports, Identity Cards, Birth and Death certificates, before finalization of the Annual Estimates for FY2024/25, the Cabinet Secretary for National Treasury and Economic Planning enhances the Appropriation-in-Aid for the Department by increasing the current allocation to 20 percent of all the revenues it generates to the Exchequer through issuance of documents (an equivalent of KSh 3.980 billion in the FY 2024/25 Revenue estimates). | In the FY 2023/24, the National Treasury provided KSh 1.3 billion as Appropriation in Aid (A.i.A) to the State Department for Immigration and Citizen Services to help address cash flow challenges. In the FY2024/25 budget, the State Department has been allowed to utilize A.i.A amounting to KSh 3.9 billion in compliance with the resolution of the National Assembly to address challenges on issuance of documents such as Passports, Identity Cards, and Birth and Death certificates. It is important to note that the A.i.A allocation to MDAs is not pegged on percentage collection but on assessed needs of the MDA. |\n| 15. To improve the gender responsiveness of government policies, before finalization of the 2025 Budget Policy Statement, the National Treasury to incorporate a section on the gender responsiveness of the various policy proposals in line with international best practices.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | The Government is committed to embracing Gender Responsive Budgeting (GRB) to ensure achievement of equity between genders. We also recognize that Gender responsiveness is critical in boosting economic growth and for sustainability. In this regard, the National Treasury is committed to adhere to this resolution of the National Assembly.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |\n| 16. The East Africa Customs Management Act, 2004 allows the Council of Ministers to review the regional customs tariffs, and these changes have not been subjected to public participation. The National Treasury to ensure that any such reviews are subjected to public participation and submitted to the National Assembly before they are formally ratified.                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | The National Treasury remains committed to ensuring effective public and stakeholder engagement in all policy formulation and implementation process. The National Treasury wishes to underscore that the proposals to amend the East Africa Customs Management Act usually come from EAC Partner States. Thereafter, the East Africa Legislative Assembly conduct public participation on the consolidated proposals in all EACPartner States.                                                                                                                                                                                     |"},{"table_page":138,"section":"Annex Table 5: Policy Resolutions by Parliament on Previous Budget Policy Statements","markdown":"| Resolution                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Action taken                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |\n|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | On the other hand, the proposals for review of regional customs tariffs normally come from the public and various stakeholders. The National Treasury together with the Kenya Revenue Authority and Ministry of Trade, Investments and Industry then engages the stakeholders who submitted the proposals for better understanding. The National Treasury will begin to submit reviews of regional customs tariffs to the National Assembly starting from 30th April 2024. |\n| 17. Given the delays in approval of the County Government Additional Allocations Bill and subsequent interruption in implementation of those programmes, the Cabinet Secretary for National Treasury and Economic Planning ensures that there are no requests for mid-year revisions in compliance with the provisions of section 191(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012. | The National Treasury will comply with this resolution.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |\n| 18. By 30 th April 2024, the National Treasury to submit a detailed report on Public-Private Partnership (PPP) projects to the National Assembly. This report should address the shortcomings identified in the 2024BPSby providing comprehensive information on the nature, scope, and status of individual PPP initiatives.                                                        | The National Treasury submitted a detailed report on Public-Private Partnership (PPP) projects to the National Assembly. The details were annexed to the 2024 Budget Summary (Annex 1), providing the required information on PPP projects.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |\n| 19. Before finalization of the FY 2024/25 budget estimates, the National Treasury to transfer the resources previously being utilized by the Government Delivery Services from the Office of the Prime Cabinet Secretary, Vote 1013, to the State Department for Performance and Delivery Management where the service is currently domiciled.                                       | During the preparation of the FY 2024/25 Budget, allocations for the functions that were being performed by the Government Delivery Services were prioritized under the State Department for Performance and Delivery Management. In addition to this, the State Departments Budget is prioritized towards delivery of its mandate as provided for in the Executive Order No. 1 of 2023.                                                                                   |\n| 20. Before submission of the 2025 BPS, the National Treasury to authorize the National Land Commission to be a collector of revenue for the National Government as per Section 76(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012 to enhance AIA collections in the sector.                                                                                                            | The National Treasury will endeavour to engage the National Land Commission on the enhancement of the Appropriation in Aid, National Government as per Section 76(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |"},{"table_page":139,"section":"Annex Table 5: Policy Resolutions by Parliament on Previous Budget Policy Statements","markdown":"| Resolution                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | Action taken                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |\n|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n| 21. The Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission, in close collaboration with the National Treasury, undertakes a thorough scrutiny and audit of all the pending bills, particularly the bills owed to suppliers with a view to settling the eligible pending bills.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | The National Treasury is committed to ensuring payment of all pending bills within a sustainable fiscal framework. The Cabinet Secretary, the National Treasury and Economic Planning under Gazette Notice No. 13355 of 30 th September 2023, appointed a Pending Bills Verification Committee (PBVC) to carry out a thorough analysis of the stock of pending bills that have accumulated from June 2005 to June 2022. Among other tasks the PBVC is to develop reforms or measures that will ensure future accumulation of pending bills is avoided. The PBVC is already working on the pending bills verification exercise after receiving submissions from MDAs including those by the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission from 29th January to 2nd February 2024. The PBVC will be making recommendations on the eligible pending bills that will be paid in the FY 2024/25 and the Medium Term. |\n| 22. Before finalization of estimates for FY 2024/25 and in line with the Presidential Working Party Report on Education Reforms, the National Treasury to transfer the Low-Cost Boarding Schools (LCBS), function and the attendant budgetary provisions to the National Council for Nomadic Education in Kenya (NACONEK), which is best suited to implement the programme. This will ensure that the LCBSs are given adequate attention to address education disparities and oversee interventions that will enhance access, retention, transition and completion rates in ASAL areas. | The National Treasury transferred an allocation of KSh 400 million to National Council for Nomadic Education in Kenya (NACONEK).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |"},{"table_page":140,"section":"Annex Table 6: Highlights of the Issues Raised During Public Sector Hearings","markdown":"| CATEGORY OF ISSUE                               | ISSUES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | PROPOSED WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |\n|:------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n| AGRICULTURE, RURAL AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (ARUD) | AGRICULTURE, RURAL AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (ARUD)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | AGRICULTURE, RURAL AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (ARUD)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |\n| Policy Issues                                   | ● Long queues and limited access in fertilizer distribution ● Extension service ratio too low (1:3000 vs 1:400 standard) ● Need for more support to farmers for food security ● Livestock breeding, disease control, and drought mitigation ● Need for subsidies for other farm inputs besides fertilizer | ● National Cereals Produce Board (NCPB) centres available in all counties from where the farmers get the fertilizers. Plans underway to use the Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups (VMGs) system, to support targeted distribution of the fertilizer ● The sector mentioned that there is ongoing collaboration with counties to improve staffing. ● Farmers are supported through seed subsidies and the revival of agricultural clubs in schools to boost agricultural production. There are also efforts on exploration of Land Commercialization Initiatives to increase food production ● Multiple breeding centers have been operationalized in the country (Kirinyaga, Naivasha, Marimati, Barchuma, among others). The 'DRIVE' programme provides insurance that compensates farmers for losses of animals due to drought.; ongoing vaccination campaign for animals that is meant to minimize animal diseases; KAGRIC is currently providing/distributing drought-resilient animal genetics to ASAL livestock farmers; and provision of concessional loans and grants as well as digital financing systems, to farmers to improve their access to funds for livestock feed. ● The sector indicated that plans are underway to expand subsidies beyond seeds. |\n| Project Implementation Issues                   | ● County-specific agricultural programmes ● Need for revival of pyrethrum farming ● Low prices and value addition for mangoes produced in the Kitui county                                                                                                                                                | ● Programmes should be tailored to county resources; includes fish landing sites, aquaculture with construction of dams in some counties to boost multipurpose functions. ● Sector reported that a request for KSh 534M was submitted to Treasury for factory restoration ● Farmers were encouraged to process mangoes to increase earnings.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |"},{"table_page":141,"section":"Annex Table 6: Highlights of the Issues Raised During Public Sector Hearings","markdown":"| 0                                        | 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |\n|:-----------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n| Resource Allocation Issues               | ● Funding gaps for key agricultural programmes ● Alternative Agricultural Financing Mechanism ● Clarification on the gap between sector requirements and allocations                                                                                                                                                                 | ● The function is majorly devolved. Further Partnerships with FAOandother development partners for Agricultural production improvement are being pursued. ● PPPs, private developer partnerships, and commercialization initiatives underway to increase production at a lower cost and reduce funding gaps ● There are plans to explore alternative financing mechanisms such as PPPs, privatization, securitization, among others.                                                                                             |\n| Governance Issues                        | ● Clarification on Veterinary Services Development Fund                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | ● Affirmed as one of the existing funds; being updated to align with PFM Act.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |\n| Governance Issues                        | ● Concerns on the governance issues in tea sector; low bonuses in some areas                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | ● The sector reported that there are reforms being implemented; value addition emphasized. ● Tea boards to provide information where there are other deductions during bonus issue                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |\n| ENERGY, INFRASTRUCTURE, AND ICT (EI&ICT) | ENERGY, INFRASTRUCTURE, AND ICT (EI&ICT)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | ENERGY, INFRASTRUCTURE, AND ICT (EI&ICT)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |\n| Policy issues                            | ● Tolling on Roads and Road maintenance levy paid at the fuel pump amounts to double taxation. ● The EPRA Price control model for fuel prices is benefiting only those along the pipeline infrastructure and in major towns. ● Access to digital infrastructure for children, including those living with disability, to support CBE | ● The road tolling policy was subjected to public participation in early 2025, and feedback has been received from Kenyans. ● Part of the fuel levy is used for road maintenance for already constructed roads in urban and rural areas. The fund is distributed to national, county, and agency levels, including KENHA (40 percent), KURA (15 percent), and KWS(1 percent), among others. ● Budget for the infrastructure, equipment and materials for children to facilitate CBE and training to acquire technological skills |\n| Resource allocation Issues               | ● Inadequate resources for road maintenance and the construction of new roads. Road construction portfolio requires KSh 413 billion, has been allocated KSh150 billion in 2026/2027, which is not adequate to construct all the roads needed in the country; hence, other sources of funding are required.                           | ● The government, through the State Department for Roads, has adopted the PPP model to construct some of the new roads to bridge the funding gaps. The establishment of the Infrastructure fund is also targeting to avail resources for these infrastructure                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |\n| Governance Issues                        | ● Protection from harmful digital content ● Poor road quality in some urban and rural roads, especially all-weather roads under county governments.                                                                                                                                                                                  | ● The government is working with the office of the data protection commissioner to ensure the security of data and digital content, as well as working with technology players (Google, Twitter, etc) to ensure protection from harmful digital content.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |"},{"table_page":142,"section":"Annex Table 6: Highlights of the Issues Raised During Public Sector Hearings","markdown":"| 0                             | 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |\n|:------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | ● The standards for the construction of all roads are available, but the limitation is on the resources allocated                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |\n| EDUCATION SECTOR              | EDUCATION SECTOR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | EDUCATION SECTOR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |\n| Policy issues                 | ● Parents are being forced to pay despite Free Primary Education (FPE) ● TVET- Need to embrace assistive technologies & digital accessibility ● Mental health and psychosocial support gaps ● Abolition of the Edu Afia programme                                                                                                                                                  | ● The Ministry to review FPE funding model and ensure 100percent free learning ● MoE clarified that it is embracing AI and digital tools in transition to Competency-Based Education and Training (CBET) by 2029 ● Ministry should consider revamping guidance and counselling programmes ● The Government, through the Ministry of Health rolled up a Universal Health Care programme for all citizens and cannot segregate a group of people for special treatment                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |\n| Project Implementation Issues | ● The need for mobile STEM laboratories as building permanent structures is taking too long. ● Facilities in TVETs are not inclusive for persons with disabilities ● Basic Education - Shortage of teachers ● Lack of sanitary towel support for the learners ● Enhancement of the school feeding programme to have sufficient food                                                | ● Sector indicated that efforts to avail the necessary STEM infrastructure are ongoing ● MoE reported that upgraded Special Needs TVETs including assistive devices have been provided, that the architecture of the TVETs takes into account Trainees with Disability and that. Further, it was clarified that there are TVETS specifically for Trainees with disabilities and have a state of Art (Thika TTI, Karen TTI, St. Joseph TTI, Machakos TTI for the deaf) ● TSC is undertaking staffing measures ● Sector requested to improve the budgetary provision for the programme ● The sector requested to consider increasing food ratios especially in areas where this is the only meal that the learners rely on. |\n| Resource Allocation Issues    | ● Declining numbers of learners with Special needs; delayed and partial disbursement of their funds ● Underutilization of the SNE budget despite poor facilities ● Large funding deficit in Secondary Education and delay in disbursement ● Non-payment of Grade 10 publishers has led to a halt in book supply. ● Provision of resources for JSS confirmation of teachers to PnP. | ● The ministry noted the decline is due to the transition to CBC; prioritizing LSNES in resource allocation; and engaging NT on increased funding. There is affirmative funding for Trainees with Disability, they are allocated full bursary/ scholarships ● The sector clarified that this is one of the areas marked for special focus in the MTEF period. ● The Ministry should review allocation and absorption gaps and ensure that funds reach schools on time. The sector agreed to consider reallocation of funds, be stringent on the resource utilization, collaborate with agencies, and prioritize essential learning.                                                                                       |"},{"table_page":144,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| 0                                             | 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |\n|:----------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                                               | ● Health financing gaps in the management of Non- Communicable Diseases in Kenya (diabetes, cancer, hypertension and cardiovascular disease) ● Malnutrition in Elgeyo Marakwet and the county teams lack sufficient tools and equipment to handle the challenge.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |\n| Resource Allocation Issues                    | ● Underfunding of HIV programmes, immunisation, family planning, RMNCAH, and NCDs management (diabetes, cancer, hypertension, CVD). ● Mental health financing remains far below the WHO- recommended 5 percent of the health budget. ● Pending bills under NHIF (civil servants who died during COVID-19 are not compensated). ● Concern in decline in target achieved under immunization and if the Immunization financing targeting is aligned to the projected population. ● Nutrition programme under funded in 2025/26 ● Underfunding of Reproductive Maternal, New-born Child, and Adolescent Health Programme ● Strengthening of primary healthcare with a resource requirement of KSh 10 billion but allocated KSh 4,426.48 million in 2026/27 | ● The sector was requested to increase funding for the immunisation programme to move from 85 percent to 100 percent, as well as to increase the Primary Health Care Fund allocation for FY 2026/27. ● It requires an additional KSh 5 billion annually. Adedicated budget line for family planning is recommended to track its financing. ● Increased allocation should go to Community Health Promoters (CHPs) to pay stipends, further facilitate the transfer of health services to counties according to Schedule 4 of the Constitution |\n| Governance Issues                             | ● Mobile phones given to CHP are of low phone memory as well as Inadequate skills and equipment for the CHPs ● County Governments have not been paying their share of the CHP incentives, even though the National Government continues to remit its KSh 2,500 contributions ● Shortage of Medical supplies stock in Health facilities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | ● Health is majorly devolved. It is the responsibility of County Governments to acquire drugs from KEMSA and avail them to their hospitals                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |\n| GENERAL ECONOMICAND COMMERCIAL AFFAIRS (GECA) | GENERAL ECONOMICAND COMMERCIAL AFFAIRS (GECA)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | GENERAL ECONOMICAND COMMERCIAL AFFAIRS (GECA)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |\n| Policy issues                                 | ● Consider zero rating for production of essential goods ● Lack of financial literacy, lack of jobs and high poverty among communities ● Budget should be gender and child sensitive (per TNT Circular 11/2024 &8/2025                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | ● Zero-rating is discouraged due to high corruption risks in supply chains. ● The sector was requested to enhance Hustler Fund support and financial literacy programmes ● Sector to incorporate gender and child matters, especially within MSMEs and State Department for Investment programmes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |"},{"table_page":145,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| 0                                       | 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |\n|:----------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                                         | ● MSMEs loans requirements as the target population (youth) are majorly fresh graduates with no collateral                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | ● Review of the MSMEloansqualification criteria to make it more accessible to youths                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |\n| Project Implementation Issues           | ● ASAL- Repetitive budgeting for boreholes/dams without sustainable alternatives                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | ● The sector should explore long-term water solutions e.g., underground dams)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |\n| Resource Allocation Issues              | ● High sector requirements vs low historic allocations                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | ● It was recommended that the sector should review the targets to match the allocations. The Sector however clarified that there is constrained fiscal space and thus critical programmes are prioritized                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |\n| Governance Issues                       | ● Market access challenges, counterfeits, and weak MSME support ● Ease of doing business especially in the Northern Corridor ● Some of the issues reported as emerging issues are within the control of the sector/ Government such as high interest rates and market access constraints ● Conflict resolution between the Pokot and Turkana communities along the Turkwel Gorge | ● Strengthen market regulation and MSME empowerment initiatives. The sector outlined that there is a committee in place looking into the issues of counterfeits. ● Increase funding to regulatory agencies; improve oversight ● The weights and measures department be well funded to facilitate automation of its services to boost confidence of even importers ● Integration of Turkana &West Pokot County using the resources generated from Turkwel Gorge dam. The water from the Dam is proposed to be used in irrigation downstream as a measure to engage the communities in other commercial activities |\n| GOVERNANCE, JUSTICE, LAWANDORDER(GJLOs) | GOVERNANCE, JUSTICE, LAWANDORDER(GJLOs)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | GOVERNANCE, JUSTICE, LAWANDORDER(GJLOs)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |\n| Policy issues                           | ● Forensic Laboratories                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | ● The establishment of forensic laboratories should be expedited to improve service delivery, which has been hindered by a lack of evidence.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |\n| Policy issues                           | ● IEBC should adopt advanced voting technologies that enable eligible voters to cast their ballots remotely                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | ● Adoption of technology supported; however, current low trust in IEBC may challenge successful implementation.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |\n| Policy issues                           | ● Adoption of technology in the police service                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | ● It was agreed that the police service needs modern equipment and ICT infrastructure to enhance service delivery and reduce corruption.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |\n| Policy issues                           | ● Modernization of the police service and training                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | ● There is a necessity to enhance police services through acquiring modern technology, ICT, and infrastructure. ● It was noted that the police require ongoing training, skilling, reskilling, and upskilling of officers for improved crowd management during riots and protests. ● Funds have been requested from the National Treasury for this purpose.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |"},{"table_page":146,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"|                               | ● Police housing and accommodation                                                                                                                                                  | ● It was noted that police officers' living conditions were relatively poor and that, therefore, housing and accommodation conditions need to be improved to enhance service delivery.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |\n|:------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n| Project Implementation Issues | ● Inadequate police training for crowd control ● Voter registration issues and shrinking public trust in the electoral process ● Need for child protection units across the country | ● Police training to be continuous and expanded for better riot management. ● It was noted that registration issues may have been caused by poor network connectivity in some regions, particularly in the ASALs, and efforts are underway to resolve them. ● Child protection units have been established in all counties, either within police stations, children's service departments, civil society organisations, non-governmental organisations, or other entities. The units are well funded, but the community need to be sensitised on the same |\n| Resource Allocation Issues    | ● It was noted that some agencies have been allocated limited resources, yet they provide key services in the country, such as EACC, IEBC and NPS.                                  | ● It was clarified that the allocations in the report were indicative ceilings and could be adjusted over time.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |\n| Resource Allocation Issues    | ● Adequate resource allocation for IEBC                                                                                                                                             | ● Civic education on voter registration is a crucial but costly endeavour that demands significant resources. The commission is working to enlist development partners and stakeholders to fill the resource gap. ● There is a request to the Treasury to provide or allocate additional resources to the IEBC, given that the commission's establishment was delayed and may therefore be experiencing backlogs. ● Further, the general election is near, and therefore, there is a need for adequate preparations, which require resources.             |\n| Resource Allocation Issues    | ● How to determine the percentage of resources that goes to general administration and actual program implementation?                                                               | ● According to budget guidelines, 70 percent of the revenue is allocated to recurrent expenses and 30 percent to development. ● The General Administration Program includes both support and technical programs, so it might not be clear what percentage goes to each.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |\n| Resource Allocation Issues    | ● No allocation to disaster and risk reduction for FY 2026/27                                                                                                                       | ● It was clarified that the program had no allocation since it was moved to the State Department for Special Programs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |\n| Governance Issues             | ● Slow rate of decentralisation of legal aid ● Need for provision of data on femicide&GBV ● IEBC Campaign Finance Bill rejected ● Shrinking public trust in IEBC                    | ● The National Legal Aid Fund has not been established, as it requires a framework/regulation to establish it. The regulations have been developed and are awaiting approval.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |"},{"table_page":148,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION, WATERANDNATURALRESOURCES (EPWNR)   | ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION, WATERANDNATURALRESOURCES (EPWNR)                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION, WATERANDNATURALRESOURCES (EPWNR)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |\n|:-----------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n| Policy issues                                              | ● Youth groups &CBOs need more empowerment ● Quality of tap water from water schemes ● Increased Human-wildlife conflict                                                                                                                                                           | ● Consider assigning Environment cleaning and sanitation contracts to the youth groups ● The Ministry is improving water treatment to ensure drinkability, though it was reported that it is working on minimizing water rationing and that water from regulated water schemes can be drunk directly from the tap ● It was indicated that measures are being put in place in the medium term                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |\n| Project Implementation Issues                              | ● Restoration of ASAL regions ● Large resource gaps ● Over-reliance on donor funding; project delays ● Completion of Thwake Dam ● Lack of mechanisms to protect planted trees ● Indigenous seedlings to be procured from local communities ● Itare Dam financing has been resolved | ● It was recommended that the sector should drill more Boreholes and dams for irrigation; and indigenous trees to be grown should be sourced locally ● This was indicated to be due to limited fiscal space, though prioritization is ongoing ● The sector indicated that the Infrastructure Fund proposed aims to reduce reliance on external funds for the development of the large infrastructure including dams. ● The project has been prioritized for completion in the Budget period ● The sector should work collaboratively with the local communities to ensure the planted trees are sustained to grow to maturity ● It was agreed that indigenous trees to be grown will be sourced locally ● Initial project funding of KSh 5 billion had been released; works to resume |\n| Resource Allocation Issues                                 | ● Insufficient water in schools; need more boreholes                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | ● The sector has been drilling school boreholes and water kiosks in the markets where the school boreholes had been done. It acknowledged that it shall consider increasing target based on available funds                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |\n| Governance Issues                                          | ● Waste disposal near schools/residences ● Huge pending bills & court awards emanating from State Agencies suing each other ● Tree cutting in Nakuru                                                                                                                               | ● The Environment and Climate Change sub sector took note and committed to take enforcement action ● The Government had issued circular directing all State Agencies to avoid suing one another in courts, instead use internal dispute resolution mechanisms ● It was clarified that the Trees being harvested had attained maturity and replanting was ongoing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |\n| PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (PAIR)   | PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (PAIR)                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (PAIR)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |\n| Policy Issues                                              | ● Ballooning wage bill                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | ● Ongoing discussions with the IMF and the World Bank; digital solutions are considered to reduce costs.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |"},{"table_page":149,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| 0                 | 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |\n|:------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                   | ● Monitoring and Evaluation sensitization program for the community ● Strategies to manage public debt and the accumulating pending bills ● Strategies in place for Long-term disaster & risk management needs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | ● It is an ongoing process and will extend the reach to the rural areas ● Some of the proposed measures to generate more revenue to help pay the debts are: Strengthening austerity measures to reduce government expenditure and Accountability by institutions such as EACC, COB, OAG, CAJ, among others ● There is a National Disaster and Risk Management Policy and Bill in parliament awaiting approval. Issues with rising water levels are a new phenomenon under study; various stakeholders are being engaged to identify the causes and develop solutions.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |\n| Governance Issues | ● Court awards are not honoured by the government. ● Need for adherence to fiscal discipline and strengthened debt management. ● Perceived extravagance and wastage in government institutions ● Risk of digitilization and digitization of government services ● Weak community sensitization on government programmes, such as the budget-making process in rural areas ● Overlap between NPS &chiefs and unpaid village elders ● Corruption complaints in the pensions department poor service delivery ● E-citizen revenue management ● A concern as to why MPs manage NG-CDF in the counties rather than having the funds under some ministry | ● Some of the awards have been paid, while others have not, due to limited resources or a lack of provision. There is a plan in place to explore alternative ways to raise resources to comply with the court awards. ● The Government continues implementing fiscal consolidation measures to reduce public debt ● ● Clarified that the government has significantly reduced meeting costs by hosting at State House rather than hotels. ● Adopt frequent system auditing to reduce risks of hacking and cybersecurity threats ● Community sensitisation is an ongoing process. Huduma Centres have been established in all counties to deliver services and raise public awareness of various government programmes. Public participation is enshrined in the constitution and is a significant part of the budget-making process. The Treasury has complied with this provision. ● The concern lies in the State Department for Internal Security and National Administration, where the issue will be taken up and addressed adequately by the relevant sector. ● Citizens were advised to submit complaints and evidence of the complaints reported for investigations. It was reported that the pension department is being digitized. ● The government owns the portal. The revenue collected through e-citizen is usually submitted to the relevant institutions for their use |"},{"table_page":150,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SOCIAL PROTECTION, CULTURE AND RECREATION   | SOCIAL PROTECTION, CULTURE AND RECREATION                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | SOCIAL PROTECTION, CULTURE AND RECREATION                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |\n|:--------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n| Policy issues                               | ● Community Health- Low awareness and unclear roles of community actors ● Confusion on gender-validation responsibilities ● Exclusion of transgender/intersex persons ● Eligibility age for the Inua Jamii programme set at 70 despite life expectancy of 68 ● Lack of AI integration ● Youth employment- Overreliance on foreign jobs; lack of support for freelancers ● Disability inclusion- Poor representation of PWDs; insufficient stipend (KSh 2,000) ● Weak child movement monitoring; high child abuse rates ● Proposal for Child Welfare Fund | ● Ministry to enhance outreach initiatives for sensitization ● The sector should create awareness on the mandates for the various actors under gender related matters. ● Recommendation to reduce the age to 60 years for qualification of the Inua Jamii programme from 70 years to 60 years ● Inquiry was noted and sector agreed that it will explore AI in the services it offers ● The sector was recommended to have a structured youth employment and freelancer support programmes ● Proposal to raise stipend to KSh 4,000; improve registration; expand categories ● Need strengthened child protection systems ● A proposal to have a child Welfare Fund that will support street families/ kids |\n| Project Implementation Issues               | ● The OVC programme is repeatedly underachieving targets ● Sanitary towels programme- Very low achievement (2.4M vs target 11.1M); unclear data ● Women Empowerment- Large spending with limited measurable results                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | ● The Ministry requested clarification of systemic challenges that have resulted to the under achievements ● Need clarity on financial inconsistencies and implementation challenges ● The Sector was recommended to strengthen M&Eand outcome tracking                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |\n| ● Resource Allocation Issues                | ● Delay in disbursement of the Senior citizens stipend and as well as it being low value (KSh 2,000) ● Need to reinstate child protection programme funding                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | ● Recommendation to raise the amount and also improve timeliness of its disbursement ● Recommendation to restore allocations                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |"},{"table_page":152,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA                                                                                        | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |\n|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n| Consolidating Gains Under Bottom - Up Economic Transformation Agenda for Inclusive and Sustainable Growth | Prioritize high-multiplier sectors such as agriculture by providing sufficient support towards fertilizer subsidy, irrigation, and extension services; social protection to cover eight million extremely poor Kenyans; and increase allocations for climate adaptation and resilience fund.                                                                                                  | The Government remains committed to prioritizing high- multiplier sectors to drive inclusive growth. This includes supporting agriculture through fertilizer subsidies, irrigation, and extension services; expanding social protection coverage; and increasing allocations for climate adaptation and resilience initiatives to safeguard livelihoods and strengthen the country's capacity to respond to climate -related risks.                                                                                                                                                 |\n| Consolidating Gains Under Bottom - Up Economic Transformation Agenda for Inclusive and Sustainable Growth | Agriculture should be the most heavily invested sector in the 2026/27 - 2028/29 MTEFperiod. Investment should focus on irrigation, extension services, and lowering the cost of inputs to ensure food sovereignty                                                                                                                                                                             | Agriculture is instrumental in advancing Kenya's development agenda. Over the 2026/27 - 2028/29 MTEF period, National Government funding allocations for ARUD are projected at KSh 97.0 billion in FY 2026/27, KSh 91.2 billion in FY 2027/28, and KSh 101.6 billion in FY 2028/29, reflecting the Government's commitment to sustainable development and economic growth. As a devolved function, these investments complement county-level initiatives to enhance agricultural productivity, rural development, and urban food security.                                          |\n| Consolidating Gains Under Bottom - Up Economic Transformation Agenda for Inclusive and Sustainable Growth | The 2026 Budget Policy Statement should explicitly indicate that the stipend framework for Community Health Promoters (CHPs) will be addressed through coordinated efforts within intergovernmental frameworks. Additionally, the National Government should ensure that both the financial and work-related needs of CHPs are met to enable effective delivery of community health services. | In Kenya, CHPs are central to the Community Health Strategy and play an essential role in advancing universal health coverage (UHC) by improving access to preventive and promotive health services at the community level. The stipend framework for Community Health Promoters (CHPs) will be addressed through existing intergovernmental coordination mechanisms, in line with the respective mandates of the National and County Governments. Measures are also being undertaken to ensure that both the financial and work-related needs of CHPs are adequately supported, in |"},{"table_page":153,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |\n|:---------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      | and Settlement additional focus could also be placed on the infrastructure, especially focusing on clean water supply or                                                                                                            | order to enhance the effective delivery of community health services.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |\n|                      | OnHousing supporting access, waste disposal, and effective sewer systems to address the increasing housing numbers under the Affordable Housing program                                                                             | The Government is committed to ensuring universal access to clean and safe water, improving sanitation, enhancing national water storage capacity, and expanding irrigation to strengthen water security and food production. As part of ongoing efforts, investments are being made to enhance access to clean water, improve waste management, and expand sewer systems in housing developments, ensuring that increasing housing numbers are matched with adequate and sustainable infrastructure. |\n|                      | The Government should shift focus from providing loans to supporting direct production. By investing in manufacturing and value-addition hubs, the youth can participate in the real economy as producers rather than just debtors. | The Government has invested in manufacturing and value- addition hubs, including County Aggregation and Industrial Parks, to support direct production and strengthen value chains. Affordable credit for MSMEs remains essential to enhance start-ups, liquidity, and participation of youth and other producers in the real economy.                                                                                                                                                                |\n|                      | Resources currently allocated to affordable housing projects should be redirected to more pressing social and economic sectors.                                                                                                     | The Government recognizes the need to prioritize resources for sectors with the greatest immediate social and economic impact. While affordable housing remains a long-term priority, current allocations have been reviewed to ensure that funding for pressing areas such as health, education, and social protection are adequate to support the implementation of their programs.                                                                                                                 |\n|                      | The 2026 BPS should detail more targeted and robust measures to reduce corruption. Ensuring that budgeted funds reach their intended recipients is essential for restoring public trust and achieving the                           | The Government is committed to strengthening public finance management measures to ensure that budgeted resources are used efficiently and reach their intended beneficiaries. This includes enhancing financial oversight, improving public                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |"},{"table_page":154,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |\n|:---------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      | objectives of the Bottom-Up Economic Transformation Agenda (BETA).                                                                                                                              | financial management systems, leveraging digital platforms such as e-Government procurement for transparency, and enforcing accountability mechanisms across all sectors. These measures will support the effective implementation of the Bottom-Up Economic Transformation Agenda (BETA) and help restore public trust in the use of public resources.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |\n|                      | In the 2026 BPS the acronyms KESONIA, KEPSS and RTGS have been used. These may need to be defined for ease of reference and understanding by the public.                                        | The acronyms have been defined accordingly.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |\n|                      | The Government should ensure full disbursement of the remaining KSh 3.348 billion allocated to County Aggregation Centers and Industrial Parks to enhance the implementation of these projects. | The Government has set aside KSh 3.25 billion in the FY 2026/27 for implementation of County Aggregation and Industrial Parks (CAIP). The funds will continue to support construction of CAIPs across the country which are expected to be completed by 2027.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |\n|                      | Priority should also be given to climate-resilient and food security- oriented investments to reduce vulnerability to recurrent droughts and other external shocks.                             | The Government is prioritizing climate-resilient and food security - oriented investments by expanding modern irrigation as a central pillar of national agricultural policy, with a focus on transforming arid and semi-arid areas into productive agricultural hubs. Food security interventions include the development of large-scale modern irrigation infrastructure comprising 50 mega dams, 200 mini-dams, and over 1,000 micro-dams nationwide to harvest and store water for irrigation and multiple-use purposes. These investments are expected to bring an additional 2.5 million acres under production within the next five to seven years, thereby reducing vulnerability to recurrent droughts, supporting agro- industrialisation and rural livelihoods, and securing water for |"},{"table_page":155,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |\n|:---------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | domestic use, crop production, and export-oriented agriculture.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |\n|                      | The Government should enhance revenue mobilization strategies, including engaging in public-private partnerships with development partners to bridge budget shortfalls and support critical development initiatives.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | The Government is undertaking a mix of tax policy and administrative measure to boost revenue collection. In addition, the Government has identified PPPs as one of the key avenues to partly fill the investment financing gap occasioned by ongoing fiscal consolidation efforts.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |\n|                      | The Government should fast-track the enactment of the Sovereign Wealth Fund Bill to establish a clear legal mandate, robust governance architecture, and strong accountability mechanisms. In parallel, the National Infrastructure Fund (NIF) should be financed exclusively through Public Private Partnerships, without introducing additional taxes on Kenyans. The Government should also clearly delineate the roles and responsibilities of the NIF in relation to existing PPP frameworks to avoid duplication and institutional overlap. A phased and realistic investment approach should be adopted, with priority given to the completion of projects already in the PPP pipeline before initiating new ones. This will help ensure timely financial close, efficient resource use, and delivery of high-impact infrastructure projects that support economic growth. | The Cabinet has approved the Sovereign Wealth Fund Policy, establishing a dedicated national fund to prudently manage revenues from mineral and petroleum resources, dividends from public investments, and a portion of privatization proceeds. Anchored on intergenerational savings, fiscal resilience, and commercially viable strategic investments, the Sovereign Wealth Fund will strengthen fiscal discipline, protect the economy from external shocks, and enhance long- term competitiveness. In parallel, the Cabinet has approved the establishment of the National Infrastructure Fund (NIF) as a limited liability company to serve as the central vehicle for aligning public finances with national development priorities. The NIF will be financed through Public Private Partnerships and other domestic resource mobilization mechanisms, including monetization of mature public assets, democratization of ownership via capital markets, and deployment of national savings, without introducing additional taxes on Kenyans. |\n|                      | The 2026 BPS should state if privatization proceeds are planned to finance the 2026/27 budget, and the projected funding amount. While a focus on food security, infrastructure expansion, and energy-driven                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Privatization proceeds are expected to form part of the broader fiscal strategy and will be directed toward financing priority development expenditures, including food security,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |"},{"table_page":156,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |\n|:---------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      | industrialization is a welcome proposal, the overall objective could be defeated without adequate transparency and accountability measures.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | infrastructure expansion, and energy-driven industrialisation. In line with ongoing State-Owned Enterprise (SOE) reforms, these proceeds will be ring-fenced to ensure they are used for their intended purposes. To safeguard the effectiveness, transparency and accountability mechanisms are being strengthened throughout the privatization process. This includes adherence to established legal and regulatory frameworks, enhanced oversight, and clear reporting on the utilization of proceeds, thereby supporting fiscal sustainability, efficiency, and long- term economic growth.                                                                                                               |\n|                      | The Government should institute measures to enhance the efficiency of recurrent expenditure within the education sector and ensure value for money, particularly in personnel costs, which remain the primary driver of spending. At the same time, a strategic review is necessary to address the declining share of development expenditure by prioritizing capital investments that support infrastructure expansion, especially in the rapidly growing TVET and junior school subsectors. | The Government is committed to ensuring value for money across all sectors, including education, by strengthening measures to enhance the efficiency of recurrent expenditure, particularly personnel-related costs. In this regard, total funding allocations for the sector have been enhanced from KSh 703.1 billion in FY 2025/26 to KSh 767.3 billion in FY 2026/27, KSh 816.3 billion in FY 2027/28, and KSh 869.4 billion in FY 2028/29. Development expenditure is also projected to rise from KSh 29.8 billion in FY2025/26 to KSh 30.1 billion in FY2026/27, KSh 35.1 billion in FY 2027/28, and KSh 43.8 billion in FY 2028/29, with a focus on infrastructure expansion and capacity enhancement. |\n|                      | Education and training programs should be better aligned with labour market and skills demand by expanding and modernizing TVET institutions and strengthening public - private partnerships to support infrastructure development and market-relevant skills training.                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | To equip learners with skills aligned to labour market demand, the Government adopted the Competency-Based Curriculum (CBC), which focuses on developing practical                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |"},{"table_page":157,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |\n|:---------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      | The Government should also modernize labour laws to reflect the realities of digital and platform-based work. To enhance job quality and earnings, policy focus should shift toward developing higher value- added digital skills, including software engineering and artificial intelligence, to complement and gradually transition from low-wage micro-task work that is increasingly vulnerable to automation. | skills, knowledge, and attitudes needed to thrive in the 21st- century economy. In parallel, Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) is being expanded and strengthened through the establishment of 100 modern TVET centers offering industry-relevant curricula and equipped with state-of-the-art facilities. In addition, the Government is now shifting its policy focus toward leveraging capital, technology, and talent to accelerate national progress. As part of this strategy, it has established the State Department for Science, Research, and Innovation to scale up Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) programmes across the education system. This institutional reform aims to strengthen innovation, promote research, and develop a pool of highly skilled professionals in science and engineering. It also provides a framework to fully operationalize the National Research Fund, with progressively increased investment to support research and technological advancement. |\n|                      | Adequate budgetary provisions should be made to support Kenya's active participation in EAC, COMESA, IGAD, and AfCFTA initiatives, coupled with the harmonization of trade, customs, and regulatory frameworks to enhance cross-border trade. The Government should also allocate resources for focused economic diplomacy programs that advance AfCFTA implementation and promote export diversification.         | The Government will continue to provide adequate budgetary support for Kenya's active engagement in EAC, COMESA, IGAD, and AfCFTA initiatives. Through these diplomatic channels, Kenya continues to attract foreign direct investment, participate in regional peacekeeping and security efforts, and advance regional industrialization and energy projects. Collaboration with international partners has also delivered technical assistance, financing, and market access support for sectors prioritized under BETA.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |"},{"table_page":158,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |\n|:---------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      | The 2026 BPS should provide further details on the measures put in place to ensure that the Social Health Authority (SHA) does not only focus on enrolment, but also clear communication on contribution and on the delivery of services for all those enrolled.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | The mandate and objectives of the Social Health Authority (SHA) are provided in the Social Health Insurance Act, 2023, which establishes the SHAto manage social health insurance, oversee contributions, contract health service providers, and ensure delivery of quality health services. Additionally, the SHAoperates under the Social Health Insurance Fund (SHIF), which finances benefits for enrolled members. These legal instruments provide the framework for the SHA to go beyond enrolment, ensuring clear communication on contribution requirements and the delivery of services to all beneficiaries.                                                                                                                                                                                      |\n|                      | The Government should consider widening the pool of target learners beyond those in ASAL regions in the school feeding program. In FY 2023/24 where the focus was also exclusively on ASAL regions, the targets were barely reached by half. There is crucial need to not just widen the pool and but also provided elaborate details on how the priority will be met. Other pro-poor programmes such as bursaries provide useful insights on where poor household live that could provide a targeting solution. | The Government recognizes the importance of effective targeting to ensure value for money and optimal impact of the school feeding programme. ASAL regions continue to be prioritized because they experience the highest levels of food insecurity, poverty, climate vulnerability, and heightened risks to school attendance, particularly during periods of drought and economic shocks. In these areas, school feeding serves not only as a nutrition intervention but also as a critical incentive for school enrolment, attendance, and retention among highly vulnerable learners. In addition, school feeding programmes also exist in other parts of the country, including non-ASAL regions, often supported through a mix of Government, County Government, and Development Partner initiatives. |\n|                      | Instead of only focusing on licensing of new film makers, the government can give tax incentives and benefits to all newly licensed film makers on cameras and other film related material to ensure they                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Licensing of filmmakers is necessary to regulate the industry, ensure professional standards, and protect intellectual property rights. It allows the Government to monitor and support participants in the creative economy, ensure                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |"},{"table_page":159,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA                                   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |\n|:-----------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                                                      | are well set for their contribution to economic transformation ensuring they add into the creative economy.                                                                                                                                                | compliance with content and safety regulations, prevent illegal or unsafe production practices, and provide a framework for access to incentives, training, and financing. Licensing also helps integrate filmmakers into the formal economy, enabling them to contribute effectively to economic transformation and the growth of Kenya's creative sector                                                                                                                                                                                          |\n|                                                      | To ensure the provision of sanitary towels in schools, budget implementation challenges hindering the delivery of this critical programme, particularly procurement-related issues, must be addressed to achieve the target of 11.1 million beneficiaries. | The Government has continued to allocate resources for the provision of sanitary towels to school-going girls to promote the dignity of girls and enhance school attendance and retention by reducing menstruation-related absenteeism. In FY 2025/26, the Government allocated KSh 940 million which has supported efforts to overcome implementation challenges and ensure effective delivery of the programme, which is critical to reaching the target of 11.1 million beneficiaries. The allocation will be enhanced in the FY 2026/27 budget. |\n|                                                      | The 2026 Budget Policy Statement should clearly outline the broad strategic priorities and policy goals alongside Budget Projections and include examples of high impact Programmes and projects.                                                          | The 2026 Budget Policy Statement outlines the Government's policy measures, highlighting broad strategic priorities and policy goals under BETAalongside budget projections. It also provides examples of high-impact MTEF programmes and projects designed to drive economic growth, improve service delivery, and support national development objectives.                                                                                                                                                                                        |\n| Recent Economic Developments and Medium-Term Outlook | Update the recent economic development with the latest data available.                                                                                                                                                                                     | The section has been updated with the latest data.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |\n| Recent Economic Developments and Medium-Term Outlook | Section 2.2 in the 2026 BPS should include a dedicated subsection on public debt developments to strengthen macro-fiscal analysis and policy coherence .                                                                                                   | Section 2.2 of the 2026 BPSprovides an overview of domestic economic performance. Annex 1 presents Kenya's public debt sustainability analysis. In addition, the 2026 Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy (MTDS) provides the framework                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |"},{"table_page":160,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |\n|:---------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      | The macroeconomic outlook remains broadly positive, with economic growth projected to strengthen over the medium term, supported by improved performance in agriculture and services, as well as the continuation of structural reforms. The outlook is consistent with      | that guides government decisions on public borrowing and debt management, and sets out the desired structure of the public debt portfolio to minimize costs, manage risks, and ensure debt sustainability over the medium term.                                                                                        |\n|                      | prevailing economic conditions. Inflation projections should be anchored at 5.0 percent over the medium term, corresponding to the midpoint of the target range.                                                                                                             | In order to sustain macroeconomic stability in FY 2026/27 and over the medium term, the inflation target has been set at 5.0 percent, with a flexible margin of 2.5 percent on either side to accommodate potential adverse shocks.                                                                                    |\n|                      | The Government should revise the GDP growth projection to 4.7 - 4.9 percent in 2025, providing fiscal planning flexibility while maintaining development ambitions. This approach is consistent with the actual growth of 4.9 percent recorded in the third quarter of 2025. | Based on performance in the first three quarters of 2025 (Q1 - 4.9 percent, Q2 - 5.0 percent, and Q3 - 4.9 percent) and the available economic indicators for the fourth quarter, the GDP estimate for 2025 has been revised to reflect the full-year outcome.                                                         |\n|                      | Review the current account balance projections to reflect the recent increase in imports of capital and intermediate goods imports.                                                                                                                                          | The current account will be reviewed to give the correct position of the economy, taking into account the most recent data on imports of capital and intermediate goods.                                                                                                                                               |\n|                      | Included the revised FY 2025/26 budget estimates in Table 2.5 and Annex Tables 1-3 to reflect fiscal performance to November 2025.                                                                                                                                           | Table 2.5 provides the fiscal performance as at 31 st December 2025. However, revision of budget estimates takes into account the performance of revenue collection, expenditure trends, and emerging economic developments to ensure that the fiscal framework remains realistic and aligned with actual performance. |\n|                      | There is need to highlight factors behind the strong and sustained improvement in the terms of trade, in 2025 and the medium-term, given                                                                                                                                     | The strong and sustained improvement in Kenya's terms of trade in 2025 and over the medium term is supported by several                                                                                                                                                                                                |"},{"table_page":161,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |\n|:---------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      | uncertainty in global economic outlook and volatility in global commodity prices particularly oil.                                                                                                                                                                                                | factors. Kenya's external position remained stable, underpinned by rising exports and a relatively favourable global environment. The implementation of key trade agreements, stronger growth in Kenya's main regional markets in Africa, and lower international commodity prices contributed to improved export performance. Additionally, the removal of certain export tariffs by China and better access to European Union markets enhanced Kenya's export competitiveness, boosted foreign exchange earnings, and helped narrow the external imbalance. Continued resilience in agricultural exports, particularly horticulture and tea, was a core driver of external sector stability, mitigating the impact of global economic uncertainty and commodity price volatility. |\n|                      | The ordinary revenue path the 2026 BPS needs to be treated cautiously and adjusted more realistically to KSh2.8 trillion, especially heading into an election period when administrative focus can shift, and compliance may weaken.                                                              | Ordinary revenue for FY 2025/26 is projected at KSh 2,744.4 billion (14.4 percent of GDP), and projections takes into account the previous year's revenue performance and emerging trends across the economy.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |\n|                      | The total expenditure and net lending for FY2025/26 should be adjusted to 20.7 percent of GDP to align with realistic revenue projections.                                                                                                                                                        | The Government aims to reduce total expenditure progressively from 23.9 percent of GDPin FY2025/26 to 20.2 percent of GDP over the medium term by ensuring fiscal discipline while maintaining support for priority development programs.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |\n|                      | To maintain a credible fiscal consolidation agenda and support debt sustainability, a deficit of KSh 940 billion (4.5 percent of GDP) for FY 2025/26 should be considered, reflecting realistic assumptions of total revenue at 16.2 percent of GDP and total expenditure at 20.7 percent of GDP. | The Government is committed to continuing its growth- friendly fiscal consolidation plan by containing expenditures without compromising service delivery and enhancing revenue mobilization. In addition, ongoing tax policy and expenditure reforms are being implemented to ensure predictability, improve compliance, and eliminate waste in the public service.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |"},{"table_page":162,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                          | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |\n|:---------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      | The Government should expand its tax base by modernizing administration, leveraging digital platforms for compliance, and leakages in revenue collection. Formalize the informal sector - | These measures support maintaining a credible fiscal consolidation agenda and underpin debt sustainability, consistent with projected deficit of KSh 1,115.8 billion (5.3 percent of GDP) in FY 2026/27, from the projected deficit of KSh 1,140.7 billion (6.0 percent of GDP) in FY 2025/26.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |\n|                      | tax curbing Kenya's informal sector contributes over 30 percent of GDP but pays a disproportionately small share of taxes.                                                                | The Government is committed to simplifying the tax system through deepened administration reforms and sustained investment in digital technology to improve compliance, broaden the tax base, and reduce revenue leakages. In addition, the Government continues to implement the National Tax Policy and Medium-Term Revenue Strategy to simplify tax laws, rationalize expenditures, and create a fair, predictable system. These reforms will also support the gradual integration of the informal sector through simplified processes, digital platforms, and strengthened taxpayer education and support                      |\n|                      | The Government should rationalise tax expenditures and exemptions by reviewing the VAT and income tax exemptions.                                                                         | The Government acknowledges the need to rationalise tax expenditures and exemptions and continues to take steps to review tax expenditure and exemptions in line with the National Tax Policy and the Medium-Term Revenue Strategy. This includes assessing the cost, effectiveness, and equity of existing exemptions to ensure they are well-targeted, time- bound, and aligned with national development priorities. The objective is to eliminate inefficient and distortive exemptions, protect critical social and productive sectors, and enhance revenue mobilization while maintaining a fair and predictable tax system. |\n|                      | The Government should expand data-driven compliance by fully integrating iTax and eTims.                                                                                                  | Kenya has made notable progress in integrating i-Tax and e- TIMS to support data-driven tax compliance. e-TIMS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |"},{"table_page":163,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |\n|:---------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      | spending must be aligned with revenue projections, high-impact investments while rationalizing recurrent                                                                                                                                                                                                             | transaction data is now linked to taxpayer profiles in i-Tax, enabling cross-validation of VAT declarations and strengthening risk-based enforcement. While full automation is still underway, the integration has already improved transparency and reduced opportunities for under-declaration.                                                                                                                                                                                                                |\n|                      | Government prioritizing expenditures.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | The Government is committed to aligning expenditure with realistic revenue projections to safeguard fiscal sustainability. This will be achieved by prioritizing high-impact and growth- enhancing investments, strengthening public investment management, and rationalizing recurrent expenditures through expenditure reviews, efficiency gains, and tighter controls on non-priority spending. These measures will ensure better value for money while supporting service delivery and development outcomes. |\n|                      | The Government should avoid overreliance on costly commercial loans, such as Eurobonds, and instead prioritize concessional financing. Additionally, borrowed funds should be directed toward capital projects that generate significant future returns, in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act, 2012. | The Government remains committed to prudent debt management by minimizing reliance on costly commercial borrowing and prioritizing concessional and semi-concessional financing where feasible. This approach is guided by the Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy and aims to reduce debt service costs and refinancing risks.                                                                                                                                                                                 |\n|                      | The Government should rationalize expenditure to ensure that the fiscal deficit does not exceed 3.5 percent of GDP, in line with the fiscal consolidation policy.                                                                                                                                                    | The Government remains committed to its fiscal consolidation plan, aiming to reduce the fiscal deficit to 3.2 percent of GDP over the medium term. Fiscal discipline is reinforced through rationalizing expenditure, prioritizing high-impact and growth- enhancing investments, and strengthening expenditure controls to improve efficiency and value for money. Continued efforts to rationalize tax expenditures are ongoing. Tax expenditures declined to 1.77 percent ofGDPin2024from                     |"},{"table_page":164,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |\n|:---------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      | Government should enforce Medium Term Expenditure Framework discipline by applying strict ceilings on wage bill allocations to that development spending is prioritized.                                                                                                                                                                                                 | a revised 2.45 percent in 2023, reflecting the Government's commitment to streamlining tax incentives, enhancing domestic revenue mobilization, and promoting equity and efficiency within the tax system.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |\n|                      | The (MTEF) ensure                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | The legal framework stipulates that expenditure by the National Government on compensation of employees including salaries, benefits, and allowances must not exceed 35 percent of the National Government's equitable share of nationally raised revenues together with other revenues generated under Article 209(4) of the Constitution. In adherence to this requirement, the National Government's wage and benefits bill accounted for 24.9 percent of revenues in FY 2024/25, remaining well within the statutory ceiling of 35 percent. The ratio is projected to decline further to 23.1 percent in FY2026/27 and 19.6 percent over the medium term. |\n|                      | To address gaps for socio-economic transformation, the Government should implement binding medium-term fiscal anchors, enforce the 30 percent development spending rule at both allocation and execution, establish multi-year investment envelopes for social sectors, gender, and climate, and ensure that public investment pipelines are alignedtoBETA value chains. | The Government is committed to medium-term fiscal anchors to support socio-economic transformation, including enforcing the statutory 30 percent minimum for development spending. In FY2024/25, development expenditure reached 25.1 percent, slightly below the threshold due to expenditure rationalization, but are projected to rise to 28.0 percent in FY 2026/27 and remain above the recommended minimum over the medium term.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |\n|                      | The government should implement workforce audits and freeze non- essential hiring to curb wage bill expansion. This aligns with the Budget Policy Statement's call for efficiency in recurrent expenditure.                                                                                                                                                              | The Government remains committed to ensuring efficiency in recurrent expenditure, including the management of the wage bill, which stood at 24.9 percent of revenues in FY2024/25 and is projected to decline to 23.1 percent by FY 2026/27 and 19.6 percent over the medium term. To contain wage bill growth,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |"},{"table_page":165,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                       | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |\n|:---------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      |                                                                                                                                                                                        | workforce audits will be conducted to identify redundancies, and non-essential hiring will be frozen.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |\n|                      | The National Treasury and Kenya Revenue Authority must have realistic revenue projections based on the actual capacity of the economy, not aspirational targets.                       | The Government is committed to ensuring that revenue projections are realistic and grounded in the actual capacity of the economy. The National Treasury and Kenya Revenue Authority continue to base forecasts on historical collection trends, economic performance, and the impact of ongoing tax reforms, rather than on aspirational targets.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |\n|                      | Expenditure prioritization that focuses on high multiplier investments and prudent use of resources generated through genuinely monetized assets.                                      | The Government is committed to prioritizing expenditure on high-multiplier investments that generate significant economic returns. Resources will be deployed prudently, leveraging genuinely monetized assets to support growth-enhancing projects, improve service delivery, and maximize value for money.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |\n|                      | The Government should accelerate payroll digitization and Human Resource Information System (HRIS) integration to eliminate inefficiencies.                                            | Kenya has made significant progress in digitising public sector payroll through the integration of IPPD, GHRIS and IFMIS, helping to reduce payroll leakages, eliminate ghost workers and strengthen establishment control. Biometric verification and the digitisation of core HR functions have further improved payroll integrity. Building on the progress made, the Government will fast-track the full real-time integration of the system, particularly at the county level to accelerate system harmonisation and strengthen data governance to achieve a fully automated payroll system. |\n|                      | Ordinary revenue targets are ambitious given historical trends. Please consider detailing specific tax policy reforms, timelines, and enforcement strategies to achieve these targets. | The National Tax Policy and the Medium-Term Revenue Strategy (MTRS) outline the tax policy and administration reforms aimed at enhancing compliance, reducing administrative complexity, supporting investment, and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |"},{"table_page":166,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |\n|:---------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | increasing revenue collection towards 20 percent of GDPinthe medium term. Key measures include deepening tax administration reforms through sustained investment in technology to modernize the tax framework, broaden the tax base, strengthen customs valuation, and seal revenue leakages. These reforms, together with clear timelines and enforcement strategies, are expected to support the achievement of ordinary revenue targets.                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |\n|                      | Although the 2026 BPS indicates that the TSA implementation has improved cash management, enhanced visibility across government entities, and reduced idle balances, enabling more efficient utilization of public resources, with only six government accounts mapped to the TSA, this objective may minimally be realised. There is need for more accounts to be mapped into the TSA to enhance the realisation of this government initiative | To improve cash management, the migration of MDAs to the Treasury Single Account (TSA) is ongoing and is targeted to be completed by 30 th June 2026. The Government is currently working to integrate more accounts, including those of semi- autonomous agencies, into the TSA. The next phase will bring County Governments on board in FY2026/27, followed by the integration of all other National Government entities into the TSA by FY 2027/28, ensuring full realization of the objectives of the TSA initiative.                                                                                                                                        |\n|                      | The 2026 BPS captures the pending bills stock for the County Governments, while the National Governments' Pending Bills are missing, a clear gap that needs to be addressed. There is a need for the 2026 BPS to provide the details of the pending bills for the Ministries, Departments and Government Agencies, with clear timelines on how the eligible pending bills will be settled.                                                      | Section 2.4.2 of the 2026 BPS provides a progress status of the Pending Bills Verification Committee up to December 2025. As at 31 st December 2025, the Committee had analysed 91,911 claims valued at KSh 637.6 billion, representing about 80 percent of the total number of bills submitted. The update also highlight some of the measures the Government has undertaken/plans to undertake in order to settle the verified and eligible pending bills. Of the analysed claims, settlement is being operationalized through specific financing channels, with KSh 80.3 billion of pending bills related to the roads sector earmarked for settlement through |"},{"table_page":167,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA                        | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |\n|:------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | securitization, while KSh 155.3 billion has been recommended for settlement under Supplementary I of FY 2025/26.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |\n| Budget for FY 2026/27 and the Medium Term | In the 2026 BPS ARUD's funding figures show a dip then rise, but no rationale for the FY 2027/28 reduction despite ambitious targets. The Government should explain the dip.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | The 2026 BPS shows a temporary dip in ARUD funding for FY 2027/28, followed by a rise, reflecting resource reprioritization or fiscal planning adjustments in light of the next general elections. The Government remains committed to achieving ARUD targets, and alignment of resources with sector priorities.                                                                                                                                                                   |\n| Budget for FY 2026/27 and the Medium Term | Under the Energy, Infrastructure, and ICT (EII) Sector, the 2026 BPS should highlight the role of the proposed Infrastructure Fund in financing and supporting the sector's priority programs and projects.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | The 2026 BPS addresses this by highlighting the role of the proposed Infrastructure Fund in Section 1.5 of the BPS.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |\n| Budget for FY 2026/27 and the Medium Term | Under the General Economic and Commercial Affairs (GECA) sector, the 2026 Budget Policy Statement reports a substantial increase in funding from KSh 62.9 billion in FY 2026/27 to KSh 70.5 billion in FY 2027/28, followed by a marginal increase to KSh 72.7 billion in FY 2028/29. The BPS should clarify whether the increase in FY 2027/28 reflects the implementation of major programmes during that year and indicate whether the modest growth in FY 2028/29 is sufficient to sustain these programmes or if the FY 2027/28 allocations largely finance one-off interventions. | The increase in GECA sector funding in FY 2027/28 reflects the rollout and scaling up of major programmes planned for implementation over the medium term. As outlined in the 2026 BPS, the sector plans to implement 16 programmes aligned with Kenya Vision 2030 and the Bottom-Up Economic Transformation Agenda (BETA), covering regional development, trade promotion, industrial growth, MSME support, digitization, investment promotion, tourism, and regional integration. |\n| Budget for FY 2026/27 and the Medium Term | Provide clarification on what informs the downwards revision for the ordinary revenue projection for FY2026/27 by KSh 96.4 billion (from KSh 2,998.3 billion in BROP 2025) despite the projection of improved economic growth in 2026 given that there are ongoing reforms in tax policy and revenue administration aimed at broadening the tax base.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | The Government has revised the medium-term fiscal projections in the 2026 BPS from the 2025 BROP to reflect actual budget implementation in the first half of FY 2025/26. Preliminary estimates indicate that total ordinary revenue fell short of target by KSh 115.3 billion in December 2025 (Table 2.5) of the 2026 BPS. This has necessitated revision in the                                                                                                                  |"},{"table_page":168,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |\n|:---------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      | The 2026 BPS indicates a deficit financing mix of KSh 1,006.6 billion in domestic borrowing and KSh 99.5 billion in external borrowing, up 64.1 percent from KSh 613.5 billion in FY 2025/26. High borrowing could destabilize the yield curve, affect market and constrain credit growth to the private sector. The should set a more prudent domestic borrowing target, aligned liquidity conditions, debt maturities, and the external while coordinating the BPS deficit strategy with the 2026 Greater use of concessional external financing and PPPs, alongside tracking verified pending bill settlements, would ease pressure on | revenue projections for FY 2026/27 to ensure realism and alignment with prevailing macroeconomic conditions.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |\n|                      | domestic confidence, Government with environment, MTDS. fast- the domestic market, support economic activity, and improve financial sector liquidity. I n the education sector, the 2026 Budget Policy Statement (BPS) should clearly indicate the number of teachers recruited against the remaining teacher requirements and outline measures to address the outstanding                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | The observation regarding the deficit financing mix in the 2026 BPS is noted. While domestic borrowing is projected to rise significantly, the Government remains mindful of the potential impact on the yield curve, market confidence, and credit availability to the private sector. To mitigate these risks, the Government will continue to implement a fiscal consolidation strategy, taking into account liquidity conditions, debt maturities, and the prevailing external environment. Efforts are also ongoing to expand the use of concessional external financing, public-private partnerships (PPPs), and settlement of verified pending bills, which collectively reduce pressure on the domestic debt market, support economic activity, and enhance financial sector liquidity. |\n|                      | gaps in order to support the Competency-Based Curriculum (CBC). The BPS should also highlight ongoing and planned teacher recruitment initiatives aimed at addressing existing shortages and ensuring the effective and sustainable implementation of CBC.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | The Government has made commendable progress in strengthening the education sector and supporting the implementation of the Competency-Based Curriculum (CBC). Between 2022 and 2025, over 150,000 teachers were recruited on permanent terms alongside 46,000 intern teachers, significantly improving teacher availability across schools. In addition, 3,300 trainers were recruited to enhance instructional capacity, while the number of Competency- Based Education and Training (CBET) candidates assessed and certified increased from 16,083 to 214,275, demonstrating strong gains in skills development and capacity building.                                                                                                                                                      |"},{"table_page":169,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |\n|:---------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      | There is a need to expedite the approval of audited accounts to give                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Building on these achievements, the Government remains committed to further improving teacher - pupil ratios through the planned recruitment of an additional 30,000 teachers, with priority given to STEM and technical subjects.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |\n|                      | a clear reflection of the total government's collection. This will increase the allocation to the counties in tandem with the prevailing economic circumstances in Kenya.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | The Government of Kenya recognizes the importance of timely approval of audited accounts to provide an accurate reflection of total Government collections and is actively striving to ensure that all government books are audited promptly. Expediting this process will enhance transparency, ensure that revenue collections are accurately captured, and enable equitable and timely allocation of funds to counties.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |\n|                      | In the 2026 BPS, the Government seeks to bring down the cost-of- living, ensure food security, create jobs, expand the tax base, improve foreign exchange balances and foster inclusive growth. The 2026 BPS projects ordinary revenue at KSh2.902 trillion, or, 13.9 per centofGDP and total revenue at KSh 3.487 trillion, which is 16.7 per cent of GDP. Historical trends indicate years of missed revenue targets. The Government should come up with concrete strategies to ensure that the projected revenue can be realised. While ordinary revenue shows strong tax mobilization, the reliance on borrowing and non- recurring inflows raises sustainability concerns, given the historical revenue performance as indicated from the provided trends in the tax to GDP ratio. The Government is optimistic that tax targets will be met, as well as bridging the deficit by additional borrowing, which will lead to heavy dependence on debt, and limited fiscal space for development spending. | The Government has revised the medium-term fiscal projections in the 2026 Budget Policy Statement from the 2025 Budget Review and Outlook Paper (BROP) to reflect actual budget implementation in FY2025/26 and the available resource envelope. These revisions are intended to ensure that revenue projections are realistic and aligned with prevailing economic conditions. Over the medium term, total revenue including Appropriations-in-Aid (AiA) is projected at 17.5 percent of GDP in FY 2027/28 and 17.0 percent of GDP in FY 2028/29, while ordinary revenue is projected at 14.7 percent of GDP and 14.4 percent of GDP, respectively. These projections are underpinned by ongoing tax administration reforms, rationalization of tax expenditures, and measures to broaden the tax base, which are expected to strengthen revenue performance. |"},{"table_page":170,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA                                  | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |\n|:----------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n| County Financial Management and Division of Revenue | The Government should include a firm, actionable commitment to resolve pending bills, including a national framework for verification, time-bound clearance plans, and enforcement measures for non- compliant counties. Strengthening Treasury oversight and linking transfers to demonstrated progress on arrears clearance will be pivotal in ensuring fiscal discipline and restoring credibility across county governments, while also improving service delivery, liquidity for suppliers, and overall fiscal stability.                                                                                                       | Section 4.3 of the 2026 BPS addresses this concern. The growing stock of pending bills in County Governments poses a fiscal discipline and sustainability risk. To address this risk, the National Treasury has started transitioning from cash basis to accrual accounting, which is expected to improve the recording of pending bills in financial statements and facilitate gradual payment.                               |\n| County Financial Management and Division of Revenue | County Governments should ensure that pending bills are prioritized as a first charge in the budget cycle. The National Treasury should state how they will go beyond the policies and reports put in place to ensure pending bills are addressed forthwith. Since pending bills sometimes arise due to procurement and accounting officers lacking expertise in capturing them at the start of the financial year and processing payments from the authorized list, government institutions should employ accountants who are members of ICPAK and continually strengthen their capacity through professional development programs. | This is in force and being monitored by Office of the Controller of Budget. The Office actively enforces these measures, particularly during the approval of withdrawals from County Revenue Fund (CRF) Accounts. Government personnel involved in public finance management are qualified professionals with the necessary credentials who undergo regular training to improve their ability to effectively serve the public. |\n| County Financial Management and Division of Revenue | The 2026 BPS should incorporate IBEC's resolution on pending Bills management where the CoB was mandated to develop the pending bills action plan template, pending bills tracking template and the pending bills universal template for adoption by the Counties. The 2026 BPS should come up with strategies to compel the counties to publish their pending bills on their websites to enhance tracking aging and gradual reduction.                                                                                                                                                                                              | Section 4.3 of the 2026 BPS addresses this concern. To progressively reduce the stock of pending bills, the Intergovernmental Budget and Economic Council (IBEC) approved and adopted the County Governments' Pending Bills Action Plan in June 2025, as submitted by the Controller of Budget. The Council further directed all County Governments to customise and implement their respective Pending Bills Action Plans.    |\n| County Financial Management and Division of Revenue | Counties should comply with their pending bills payment plan for FY 2024/25, 2025/26 and the Senate resolutions, which were                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | County Governments were directed by IBEC in June 2025 to customize and implement respective Pending Bills Action                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |"},{"table_page":171,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |\n|:---------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      | communicated in a letter to all the 47 County Governors Ref: SEN/RESOLS/05/2024(03) dated 9 May 2024.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Plans which will be monitored closely by the Office of the Controller of Budget.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |\n|                      | In reviewing performance in Own-Source Revenue (OSR) collection against targets, the 2026 BPS should highlight the key drivers behind the strong performance of the top 12 counties that exceeded 100 percent of their targets. It should also analyse the factors contributing to underperformance in other counties, including whether targets were set too high or too low, and assess whether counties are using reliable and evidence-based revenue forecasting approaches. | This has been addressed in Section 4.2.2 of the 2026 BPS. The growth in OSR could be attributed to implementation of the OSR policy, continuous capacity building on public finance management, revenue automation and revenue administration reforms such as implementation of the FIF.                                                                                                                                                                                 |\n|                      | The Government should negotiate between both levels of government to maintain county allocations at 17 percent, as was in FY 2024/25. Based on projected ordinary revenue of KSh 2.9 trillion, this would provide counties with KSh 493 billion to meet the pressures of delivering critical services and clearing pending bills.                                                                                                                                                | Section 4.5.2.1 highlights some of the factors taken into account in determining the allocation to County Governments for the FY 2026/27. The factors include, overall revenue and macroeconomic performance, and the need to meet critical/mandatory expenditures including public debt. Despite this, the Government has been increasing allocation to County Governments as demonstrated in the consistent growth of total transfers over the years in Table 4.11.    |\n|                      | The Government should establish tighter controls and monitoring mechanisms to ensure that wage expenditures do not surpass the set regulation and in compliance with regulation 25(1) (b) of the PFM County Government Regulation, 2015 and ensure timely disbursements of exchequer releases.                                                                                                                                                                                   | The National Treasury and the Office of the Controller of Budget are monitoring wage bills across County Governments and pending bills using a hybrid of administrative and technical support to County Governments to manage them. In addition to this, the Third National Wage Bill Conference 2024 came resolved that all counties managing the wage bill adhere to the fiscal responsibility principles that limits the ratio of wage bill to revenue at 35 percent. |\n|                      | There is a need for both levels of government to migrate their payrolls to the Human Resource Information System- Kenya. Further, manual                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | This has been addressed in Section 4.3 of the 2026 BPS. The use of the integrated human resource management systems is                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |"},{"table_page":172,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |\n|:---------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      | multiple and stand-alone payroll systems to cease. This will monitor and ensure that the wage bill to revenue ration does not exceed the 35% threshold.                                                                                                                                                          | already under implementation in the National and County Governments in management of the Human Resources.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |\n|                      | County governments should fast-track the automation and integration of revenue collection systems across all revenue streams to minimize leakages, enhance transparency, and improve efficiency.                                                                                                                 | This has been addressed in Section 4.2.3 of the 2026 BPS. Among the planned measures for boosting own-source revenue by County Governments is the finalization of the proposed integrated County Revenue Management System.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |\n|                      | The County Governments should adopt realistic, evidence-based revenue projections grounded in economic activity and historical performance. County Governments should also invest in capacity building for revenue officers, including training on revenue administration, to enhance efficiency and collection. | This has been addressed in Section 4.2.3 of the 2026 BPS. To boost revenue forecasting by County Governments, the National Treasury will finalize the revenue forecasting model to provide an objective criteria to set revenue targets.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |\n|                      | The Equalization Fund Advisory Board should establish project implementation units (PIUs) at the divisional level with the intention of directly transferring funds to them. This will improve efficiency.                                                                                                       | Section 44 of the Second Marginalization Policy established that pockets of marginalized areas and communities found within relatively developed counties were excluded in the first policy which considered a county as a unit of analysis. Further, Section 56 proposes use of a small area to identify a marginalized community- sub location, as opposed to using a county is necessary to improve targeting and maximum impact in improving services among the marginalized communities. The proposal to introduce further PIUs in the divisional level is; i) Not anchored within the Second Marginalization Policy, and ii) Additional PIUs will culminate to thinly spread financing of projects in the divisions- a situation that may not have |"},{"table_page":173,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |\n|:---------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | the expected impact as it has been observed even at the ward level. Extra PIUs at the division will translate to a further strain on the operational costs which, in accordance with Regulation 10(1) of the PFM (Equalization Fund Administration) Regulations 2021, provides for the expenses of the Board to be paid out of the Fund whereby section 10(3) caps it at 3% of the annual EF allocation.                                                                                            |\n|                      | There is a need to expedite the approval of audited accounts to give a clear reflection of the total G overnment's collection. This will increase the allocation to the counties in tandem with the prevailing economic circumstances in Kenya.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Parliament is mandated to approve audited accounts. The National Treasury will continue to engage Parliament to expedite.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |\n|                      | The Government should, through intergovernmental processes, prioritize some resources in FY 2026/27 to fast-track support to all 47 counties in enacting the FIF Acts and adopting a standardized implementation approach, enabling health facilities to retain and effectively utilize the revenue they generate.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | The Facilities Improvement Financing Act, 2023 stipulates that a County Government may enact legislation to give further effect to the provisions of the Act in the respective Counties. The National Treasury advise that Counties to use their own resources in enacting the legislation.                                                                                                                                                                                                         |\n|                      | Over the past year, there was 100 percent disbursement of the equitable share of revenue raised nationally in FY 2024/25 to the counties. However, this was done late as the last disbursement was made on the 24th of June 2025. This trend ordinarily made it difficult for the devolved units to meet their obligations, some citing this as the reason for the increasing stock of pending bills since they could not manage to absorb all the funds within the remaining portion of the financial year. The 2026 BPS should provide strategies that will ensure sustained growth of ordinary revenue to support the financial muscle of the devolved governments as well as timely disbursement of the allocated resources. This will enhance the credibility of their operations. | Section 4.6.2 provides one of the measures being undertaken by the National Treasury and its stakeholders in addressing delayed disbursement to counties. Multi-agency engagements have been held and a proposal has been made to amend Sections 42 and 191 of the PFM 2012. The amendments aim to address the delays in enactment of the CGAABwhichleads to late disbursement of additional allocations, disruption in service delivery and low absorption of allocated funds at the county level. |"},{"table_page":174,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |\n|:---------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      | As indicated in the 2026 BPS, the counties were unable to meet their OSR targets despite having a huge potential for revenue. The 2026 BPS should come up with stringent measures to support the counties to realise their revenue potential as indicated in their assessment through periodic capacity building and enabling national and county revenue legislation development. As observed, the revenue raised from FIF exceeded the target by 18 percent, indicating efficiency realized through FIF implementation. There is a need for the counties to be supported to strengthen the other aspects of revenue collection to match the FIF. | This has been addressed in Section 4.2.3 of the 2026 BPS. Among the planned measures for boosting own-source revenue collection by County Governments is the finalization of the proposed integrated County Revenue Management System, and revenue forecasting model to provide an objective criteria to set revenue targets. |\n|                      | Despite the 2026 BPS indicating that the last audited revenue and approved by the National Assembly and being used for revenue sharing is for FY 2021/2022, this lags behind by three financial years i.e. (FYs, 2022/23, 2023/24 and 2024/2025) for which data is nationally available within the said institutions. In order to ensure that the National Treasury uses the most current revenue data, there is need to fast rack the processing and adoption of the Audited statement of revenue by Parliament.                                                                                                                                  | Parliament is mandated to approve audited accounts. The National Treasury will continue to engage Parliament to expedite this process.                                                                                                                                                                                        |\n|                      | The 2026 BPS should propose mechanisms to assess the impact of Equalization Fund since inception and make necessary adjustments to strengthen the realisation of the intended objectives.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | This is duly noted. In addition to fully implementing the regulations, the Board of the Equalisation Fund, will explore ways to more frequently undertake and publish reviews of performance to gauge levels of achievement of objectives of the fund.                                                                        |\n|                      | On Table 4.10, has omitted the additional conditional allocations of 0.5 percent of housing levy fund to the county rural and urban affordable housing committee. Section 11(4)(c) and 11(5) of the Act provides that not less than point five percent (0.5%) of the monies from the Affordable Housing Levy shall be allocated to the county committees                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | KSh 365,991,679 being total conditional additional allocations from 0.5% of Housing Levy Fund to the County Rural and Urban Affordable Housing Committees has been included in Table 4.9 of the 2026 BPS.                                                                                                                     |"},{"table_page":175,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA                 | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                   | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |\n|:-----------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                                    | for the administration of the County Committees, the allocation of which shall be appropriated as a conditional grant to County Governments.                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |\n| Statement of Specific Fiscal Risks | Climate related fiscal risks and contingent liabilities from SOEs and PPPs need stronger mitigation measures, including a dedicated Climate Resilience Fund and a Contingent Liabilities Register. | The Government of Kenya is mitigating climate-related and SOE risks through strengthened policy, fiscal, and institutional measures. Climate risks are being addressed through implementation of the Climate Change Act and National Climate Change Action Plans, mainstreaming climate considerations into planning and budgeting, scaling up climate finance, investing in climate-resilient infrastructure and renewable energy, and strengthening disaster risk management and early warning systems. At the same time, risks from State-Owned Enterprises are being mitigated through enhanced oversight and governance reforms, improved financial reporting and transparency, rationalization of borrowing and government guarantees to limit contingent liabilities, restructuring of financially distressed SOEs, and increased private sector participation through PPPs. Together, these measures aim to safeguard fiscal sustainability, enhance resilience to climate shocks, and reduce potential fiscal pressures arising from SOEs. |\n| Statement of Specific Fiscal Risks | The fiscal risks identified are largely qualitative. Quantification of risks will enhance the usefulness of the risk statement for macro forecasting, policy analysis and stress testing.          | The National Treasury acknowledges the need to strengthen the quantification of fiscal risks to enhance their usefulness for macroeconomic forecasting, policy analysis and stress testing. To this end, the National Treasury is progressively enhancing its fiscal risk management framework through improved data collection, analytical tools and institutional coordination, through the Fiscal Risk Committee. Efforts are underway to systematically assess and quantify key risks,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |"},{"table_page":176,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |\n|:---------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      | On fiscal risk associated with public debt, the National Treasury should provide further details in this section of the potential impact of depreciation of the Kenyan shilling and the trade-offs that will be made if there is a higher cost to settle external debt. Secondly, the discussion on SOEs should be accompanied with a specific set of steps that are either in place or planned to reduce the exposure by SOEs borrowing and in line with the approval by the cabinet in 2025 to reform SOEs. In both scenarios the National Treasury should be clear on what trade-off | particularly those arising from SOEs, contingent liabilities, climate-related shocks and macroeconomic dynamics, to better inform budget planning and debt sustainability analysis.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |\n|                      | will be made to accommodate if the risks materialize and its impact.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | The National Treasury acknowledges the need to strengthen disclosure of fiscal risks related to public debt and SOEs. The 2026 BPS recognises exchange rate volatility as a key risk to external debt and outlines mitigation measures including prudent debt management, prioritisation of concessional financing, fiscal consolidation and enhanced domestic revenue mobilisation. In the event of higher debt servicing costs, the Government will prioritise expenditure rationalisation and efficiency while protecting essential services. The BPSalso aligns with the Cabinet-approved 2025 SOEreform agenda aimed at improving governance, financial transparency and reducing reliance on borrowing and exchequer support, with corrective actions such as enhanced oversight and restructuring to be applied where risks materialise. |\n|                      | The 2026 BPS should put in place solid strategies to ensure compliance with the debt anchor. Further, it should provide mechanisms to guard the utilisation of the ordinary revenues from servicing debt. The current trend may lead to persistent debt accumulation and eventual debt distress.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Annex 1 of the 2026 BPS reports on Kenya's public debt sustainability analysis. In addition, the 2026 Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy (MTDS) provides a comprehensive framework to guide government borrowing and debt management decisions, setting the desired structure of the public debt portfolio to minimize costs, manage risks, and ensure sustainability over the medium term. These measures collectively aim to prevent persistent debt accumulation, protect ordinary revenues from being diverted solely to debt servicing, and mitigate the risk of debt distress.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |"},{"table_page":177,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |\n|:---------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n| Annexes              | The BPS to have a paragraph or annex dedicated to how budget has lived to the budget guidelines need to emphasize gender and children (41.3 percent of population). The budget proposal and budget statement to have an annex on children's issues. National Treasury through implementation of the new Standard Chart of Accounts (SCOA) and IFMIS re-configuration to enable budget tagging for spending on children, gender and climate. The OCoB expenditure report to Parliament to have an annex on gender and children. The Office of the Auditor General to provide audit reports on expenditure on children and gender. | The National Treasury acknowledges the proposal to enhance the visibility and tracking of expenditure on gender and children in the budget framework. While the 2026 Budget Policy Statement does not include a standalone annex on these groups, their priorities are mainstreamed across the document through targeted sub-sections (1.3.7, 1.38, and 3.4), and sectoral interventions in health, education, social protection, Gender-based violence prevention and child welfare. At present, there is no explicit gender- or child-specific budget tagging within SCOA or IFMIS; however, ongoing public financial management reforms and programme-based budgeting provide a basis for considering such mechanisms in future. Gender and childre n's issues are currently addressed through sectoral policies and programmes implemented by line ministries, with continued prioritisation of resources to these groups. Existing accountability frameworks, including Controller of Budget and Auditor-General reports, already support oversight of expenditures benefitingwomen and children. The proposal to introduce specific annexes is noted for consideration within future PFM reforms. |\n| Annexes              | Under Annex 1 paragraph 5 The BPS should provide a full breakdown of the functional and economic classification of debt expenditure for the past three years (2022/23, 2023/24 and 2024/25). This will strengthen the BPS justification for the issue and mitigation steps as part of ensuring there is fiscal discipline.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | The BPS highlights whether the Government has adhered to the fiscal responsibility principles set out in the PFM Act, CAP 412A, ensuring that public debt and obligations are maintained at sustainable levels, as approved by Parliament for the National Government. In addition, The National Treasury publishes the Annual Public Debt Management Report, which provides a comprehensive account of Kenya's                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |"},{"table_page":178,"section":"HEALTH SECTOR","markdown":"| SECTOR/POLICY AREA   | PROPOSAL/COMMENT                                                                                                                                | WAYFORWARD/ACTION TAKEN/RESPONSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |\n|:---------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|\n|                      |                                                                                                                                                 | public and publicly guaranteed debt and outlines the Government's borrowing activities. The report aims to enhance fiscal transparency, reduce information asymmetries, and strengthen accountability by enabling effective oversight by Parliament, investors, and the public.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |\n|                      | The integration of public feedback into final priorities should be more visible. A summary of key concerns and how they influenced allocations. | Public participation in the medium-term budget process is a Constitutional requirement, and in preparing the 2026 BPS, resolutions from the 2024 and 2025 BPS were taken into account, as outlined in Annex Table 5 with explanations for actions taken. In compliance with PFM Act, CAP 412A, Public Sector Hearings were held from 19 th to 21 st November 2025 at the Kenyatta International Convention Centre to gather input from the public on the budget and sector plans. Annex Table 6 summarizes the comments received and responses provided, while Annex 7 presents feedback specific to the 2026 BPS. |"}]}